

--- PAGE 1 ---
 
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA 
Ministry of Education and Sports 
Primary School Curriculum 
Primary 5 Curriculum 
Set One: English, Integrated Science, Local Language, Mathematics and 
Religious Education (Christian Religious Education & Islamic Religious 
Education) and Social Studies. 
 
 
National Curriculum Development Centre 
August 2010 


--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRIMARY FIVE 
CURRICULUM 
SET ONE 
 
 
 
 
National Curriculum Development 
Centre 
 
 


--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 
 
NATIONAL CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT CENTRE (NCDC) UGANDA 2010 
 
 
COPYRIGHT ┬® NCDC, 2010. 
P.O BOX 7002, KYAMBOGO, KAMPALA 
KAMPALA- UGANDA 
URL. www.ncdc.go.ug 
 
 
ALL rights reserved. No part of this syllabus should be reproduced stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form by any means electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the permission of the authors and publisher. No patent liability is assumed with respect 
to the use of the information contained herein. 
 
ISBN 978-9970-117-91-8 
 
 
 
 
Published by: 
National Curriculum Development Centre 


--- PAGE 4 ---
i  
 
 
 Table of Contents  
Subject 
 
Page 
Acknowledgement 
Foreword 
Introduction 
National Aims of Education 
Aims & Objectives of Education in Uganda 
Rationale 
Structure of the Curriculum 
What the Review Addressed 
Period Allocation 
Primary Five Sample Time-table 
General methodology 
Assessment guidelines 
 ii 
iii 
iv 
iv 
iv 
v 
v 
vi 
vi 
vii 
vii 
vii 
1.  English ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ” 1 
2.  Integrated Science ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ” 25 
3.  Local Language ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ” 60 
4.  Mathematics ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ” 88 
5.  Religious Education ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”.. 109 
A.   Christian Religious Education ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ” 110 
B.   Islamic Religious Education ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ” 137 
6.  Social Studies ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ”ŌĆ” 177 


--- PAGE 5 ---
ii  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
The National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) would like to express its appreciation to all those who worked tirelessly towards 
the production of this P.4 Curriculum. 
 
Our gratitude goes to the Curriculum Task Force of the Ministry of Education and Sports for overseeing and taking timely deci sions 
whenever necessary. Our thanks also go to partners in education who provided the  professional information and technical assistance 
and guidance to enable us come up with syllabuses in the seven subjects. 
 
Our gratitude is also extended to our members of the various subject panels who worked tirelessly to ensure the various curri culum 
materials are ready within time. 
 
Lastly but not least, we would like to acknowledge all those behind the scenes who formed part of the team that worked hard t o 
finalise the work on the various syllabi. 
 
NCDC takes responsibility for any shortcomings that might be identified in the publication and welcomes suggestions for effectively 
addressing the inadequacies. Such comments and suggestions may be communicated to NCDC through: P.O. Box 7002, Kampala or 
E-mail admin@ncdc.go.ug or www.ncdc.go.ug. 
 
 
 
 
Connie Kateeba 
DIRECTOR 
NATIONAL CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT CENTRE 


--- PAGE 6 ---
iii  
 
FOREWORD 
 
The quality of education in a country is a major factor in its socio -economic development. Conscious of thi s fact, the Government of 
Uganda embarked on curriculum reviews intended to improve upon the education system at all levels. These reviews are guided b y 
the Government Consultancy Report of 2005 which was done in light of and inspired by the measures government took earlier on: 
’éĘ Government Report on Education Policy Review Commission (1989 Chaired by Kajubi); 
’éĘ Government White Paper on the implementation of the recommendations of the report of the Education Policy Commission 
1992 
’éĘ Bazil Kiwanuka Report of the Curriculum Taskforce of 1993 
’éĘ Implementation of UPE to increase accessibility without compromising quality, relevance and equity. 
 
The Ministry of Education and Sports through NCDC has handled the review in three main phases namely: 
’éĘ P1-3 Thematic Curriculum 
’éĘ P4 the Transition year 
’éĘ P5-7 the upper primary curriculum review. 
 
At each level of review there were specific focuses. At P1 -3 it was focused on development of literacy, numeracy, life skills and  
values. At P4 the focus was on addressing the transition and consolidating the achievements of thematic. While in Upper Primary (P5-
7) the focus was to consolidate the language development and prepare learners for post primary education. 
 
A curriculum of this kind is a guide to our development and is concerned with achievement of goals through a systematic coverage of 
content during the teaching/learning process in a given situation. This therefore makes it important in our educational system. 
 
I, therefore, I call upon all stakeholders to participate effectively in the implementation of this curriculum and the enhancement of quality 
education in schools by playing their roles efficiently. 
 
 
Dr. Y. K. Nsubuga 
DIRECTOR OF BASIC EDUCATION 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS  


--- PAGE 7 ---
iv  
 
1.0 Introduction 
This Primary Five Curricul um was developed after the Thematic Curriculum and the P4 Transition Curriculum based on subjects. It 
was designed to address overflows from earlier classes, content overload and unnecessary overlaps of topics. The P5 Curriculu m is 
presented in two sets of  documents. Set One comprises of English, Integrated Science, Local Language, Mathematics and Religious 
Education (Christian Religious Education & Islamic Religious Education while Set Two comprises of Creative Arts and Physical 
Education. 
 
This is Set One  Curriculum. This Curriculum is intended to address the following national aims of education in general and the aims 
and objectives of primary education in particular as outlined in the Government White Paper on the Education Policy Review 
Commission Report (1992): 
 
 
2.0 The National Aims of Education 
(a) To promote understanding and appreciation of the value of national unity, patriotism and cultural heritage, with due 
consideration to internal relations and beneficial interdependence; 
(b) To inculcate moral, ethical and spiritual values in the individual and to develop self discipline, integrity, tolerance and human 
fellowship. 
(c) To inculcate into Ugandans a sense of service, duty and leadership for participation in civic, social and national affairs through 
group activities in educational institutions and the community. 
(d) To promote scientific, technical and cultural knowledge, skills and attitudes needed to enhance individual and national 
development. 
(e) To eradicate illiteracy and equip the individual with basic skills and knowledge to exploit the environment for self-development 
as well as national development; for better health, nutrition and family life, and the capacity for continued learning; and 
(f) To equip the learners with the ability to contribute to the building of an integrated, self-sustaining and independent national 
economy. 
 
3.0 Aims and Objectives of Primary Education in Uganda 
At the Primary education level, the national aims of education can be translated to include the following aims and objectives: 
1. To enable individuals to acquire functional literacy, numeracy and communication skills in Ugandan languages and English. 
2. To develop and maintain sound mental and physical health. 
3. To instill the value of living and working cooperatively with other people and caring for others in the community. 
4. To develop cultural, moral and spiritual values of life. 


--- PAGE 8 ---
v  
 
5. To inculcate an understanding of and appreciation, for, the protection and utilization of the natural environment using scientific 
and technological knowledge. 
6. To develop a sense of patriotism and unity, an understanding of oneŌĆÖs rights and responsibilities and an appreciation of the 
need to participate actively in civic matters. 
7. To develop the pre-requisite for continuing education and development. 
8. To develop adequate practical skills for making a living. 
9. To develop appreciation for the dignity of work and for making a living by oneŌĆÖs honest effort. 
10. To develop the ability to use the problem-solving approach in various life situations; and 
11. To develop discipline and good manners. 
 
4.0 Rationale 
At P5, the curriculum takes into account the fact that: 
At P1- P3, the emphasis had been development of literacy and numeracy, life skills, values and attitude. 
- In P4 the transition year learners were introduced to subject based learning, using English as the medium of instruction. 
- P4 learning consolidated the achievements of P1 - P3 learning. 
This P5 curriculum is meant to further consolidate the achievements of the earlier classes. Each subject has stated  learning   
outcomes for each topic; content and language competences. It is also intended to provide the learners with basic knowledge in the 
various subjects, skills, attitudes, practices and values important for learners of P5 to prepare them for: 
- Secondary education. 
- The world of work. 
- Scientific and technical application of knowledge. 
- Life skills. 
 
5.0 Structure of the Curriculum 
 
5.1 Subjects in P5 Curriculum 
The Primary Five Curriculum consists of the following subjects: 
1. English 
2. Mathematics 
3. Social Studies 
 
 
 
4. Integrated Science 
5. Local Language 
6. CAPE 1 ŌĆō Music, Dance and Drama 


--- PAGE 9 ---
vi  
 
7. CAPE 2 ŌĆō Physical Education 
8. CAPE 3 ŌĆō Art & Technology 
9. Religious Education: 
- Christian Religious Education 
- Islamic Religious Education 
 
5.2 What the Review Addressed 
 
Basically there has been minimal change of topi cs in all the subjects of P5 curriculum. There will be no need for change in  
instructional materials. There are few topics shifting without much change in content apart from making content presentations  simple 
and light for learners of P5. In each subject  a matrix indicating how topics have shifted has been included. Such matrix display how 
overflows from earlier classes, overlaps, overtones, and unnecessary repetition have been addressed. 
Language competences have been expressed in each topic of every subject. Teachers will be required to pay attention to these. 
 
5.3 Period Allocation 
 
Subject Periods 
P4 P5 P6 P7 
English 6 6 6 6 
Mathematics 6 6 6 6 
SST 5 5 5 5 
R.E. 3 3 3 3 
Integrated Science 6 6 6 6 
LL 3 3 3 3 
CAPE 1 ŌĆō MDD 2 2 2 2 
2 - P.E 3 3 3 3 
3 - Art & 
Technology 
4 4 4 4 
Library Reading 2 2 2 2 
Totals 40 40 40 40 


--- PAGE 10 ---
vii  
 
5.3 Primary Five Sample Time-table 
Each lesson/period in P5 shall take a duration of 40 minutes. It is suggested that practical subjects be given at least one double 
lesson to give adequate time to practice the new skills. 
 
 
Day 8.00-8.30 8.30- 
9.10 
9.10ŌĆō 
9.50 
9.50- 
10.30 
10.30- 
11.00 
11.00- 
11.40 
11.40- 
12.20 
12.20- 
01.00 
01.00- 
02.10 
02.10- 
02.50 
02.50- 
03.30 
03.30- 
04.30 
04.30- 
05.00 
Mon 
MORNING 
ASSEMBLY 
MTC ENG CAPE2 
BREAK 
ENG LIB 
LUNCH 
BREAK RE CAPE1 
GAMES 
EVENING 
ASSEMBLY 
Tue RE MTC SST ENG CAPE3 SST LL 
Wed ENG SCE CAPE2 SST LIB LL CAPE1 ENG 
Thur MTC SST MTC LL SCE RE SCE 
Fri SCE CAPE2 MATHS SST  CAPE3 
 
 
CAPE Creative Arts & Physical Education LIB Library MTC Maths 
SCE Integrated Science  ENG English LL Local Language 
RE Religious Education SST Social Studies  
 
6.0      General Methodology 
The P5 pupils are expected to have developed sufficient basic literacy skills both in local languages and English.  In each syllabus, 
development of content and concepts has been arranged in a progressive manner according to the learnersŌĆÖ interests, progress and 
ability. The teacher is expected to enhance learning through the most effective learner -centred activities. The teacher will  be  
expected to facilitate learning as the learners do the activity based learning. 
 
In each subject, the methods a teacher chooses to use should be those which contribute towards the achievements of the 
competences, learning outcomes and  eventually lead to the achievements of the aims and objectives of Primary Education stated 
above. At Primary Five the methods used should prepare learners for effective participation in further study of the topics in  upper 
classes and eventually in secondary level. 
 
7.0      Assessment Guidelines 
In principle, continuous assessment is recommended in each subject. The assessment shall be based on the summarized 
competences suggested in each subject. The teacher is expected to manage the records of learnersŌĆÖ  results on the activities they do 
as learning progresses. 


--- PAGE 11 ---
viii  
 
 
Like in the earlier classes, the guidelines have been provided in each subject to guide the teacher carry out, manage, keep r ecords 
and utilize assessment results at various stages of learning. Records shall be kept on each individual learner, class progress and end 
of term performance. The teacher is encouraged to record those innovative products of learners that may not have been planned  but 
are indicators of positive progress of a learner. The  teacher is reminded that learners of P5 are already anxious about PLE and 
therefore need to be prepared for it. There should be regulator pen and paper assessments reflecting what is similar to PLE situations. 


--- PAGE 12 ---
1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
English 


--- PAGE 13 ---
2  
Background 
English language has been, and still is, an important subject on the primary school curriculum. Children are expected to be fluent in 
this language by the end of the primary school. 
 
In P.4, English language was used as a medium of instruction you were allowed. The English syllabus for P.5 has been prepared to 
provide the learner with opportunities to fully utilize the vocabulary and structures learnt in previous classes. 
 
Unlike in P.4, which was a bilingual class, P.5 teaching will fully be carried out in English. The topics suggested here will consolidate 
on what has so far life situation. This provides an opportunity for the leaner to practice what is leant in class. 
 
Rationale 
Uganda is a multilingual society where over thirty indigenous languages are spoken.  Until recently, when Kiswahili was declared to be 
the second official language, English has been and will continue to be the first official language.  For this reason, English is a subject 
taught from the primary to secondary levels to enable learners communicate and access information which is in English. 
 
General outcomes of teaching English in primary schools 
By the end of Primary Five learners will have: 
’éĘ Acquired effective use of the four basic language skills, that is, listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
’éĘ Developed the confidence to use English in both oral and written forms. 
’éĘ Acquired the appropriate language to use in a variety of situations. 
 
Organization of the Syllabus 
This P.5 syllabus has been arranged in matrix. The scope and sequence has b een organized around eight topics. Some of the topics 
have sub-topics. Competences to be developed have been suggested with activities related to the content. As you may be aware, in 
the English language  subject, the only new content taught is vocabulary a nd structures. This content is consolidated dialogues, 
composition, reading comprehension, rhymes, poems and language games. 
You should therefore, ensure that each week, some vocabulary, (at least four but not more than five) is taught, with one structure. 
Several periods for each topic have also been provided in the syllabus. 
 
Methodology 
Effective language teaching calls for active participation of learners.  Learners should therefore be given adequate opportunity to 
practice the vocabulary and structures learnt.  Oral practice should always be given before written practice.  The teacher should 
always use generic methods such as demonstration, discovery, role-play, research, group work, creative writing, drawing and 
reporting. 
 


--- PAGE 14 ---
3  
Teaching procedure 
It is suggested that English in P5 could be taught using the following steps. 
 
1. vocabulary 
Step 1:  Revise any related learnt vocabulary. 
Step 2:  Teach the new vocabulary using real objects, pictures or demonstration. 
Step 3:  Encourage learners to practice the pronunciation of the new vocabulary in groups, pairs and individually. 
Step 4:  Guide learners to use the new vocabulary using the structures(s) previously learnt. 
Step 5: Ask learners to make sentences in groups and them in pairs. 
Step 6:  Let learners write sentences in their books.  You can also ask them to draw pictures relating to the vocabulary. 
 
2. Structures 
Step 1:         Revise the vocabulary taught in the previous lesson. 
Step 2:         Present the new structures using demonstration. 
Step 3:         Guide learners to orally practice the structures in groups, pairs and individually. 
Step 4:         Let learners do a written practice using the structures. 
Note: Remember, one structure should be taught in a given lesson. 
 
3. Reading Comprehension 
Step 1:         Revise the structures and vocabulary previously learnt 
Step 2:          Discuss the text using pictures or stories. 
Step 3:         Set guiding questions and let the learners silently read the text.  Put emphasis on the correct reading habits. 
Step 4:         Using guiding questions, discuss the text in a plenary. 
Step 5:         Let the learners in groups, discuss the comprehension question about the text. 
Step 6: Let the learners write the answers in their note books. Encourage them to write full sentences. You may also  ask the  
  learners to summarize the text through drawings or paraphrasing. 
 
Handling writing and spelling 
Although learners are now in the upper primary, the issue of handwriting should still be emphasized. Learners with poor handwritings 
should be helped. For spelling, this should be done every day and whenever errors are made. 
 
Instructional Materials 
No successful teaching can be attained without use of appropriate instructional materials. The teacher is therefore encourage d to use 
instructional materials appropriate to the content. The teacher can use real objects, pictures, story books, reading cards, n ewspaper 
cutting, and many others. 


--- PAGE 15 ---
4  
 
Assessment 
Continuous assessment is strongly recommended. This is because it enables the teacher to assess the progress of the learner so as 
to provide assistance where it may be required. The syllabus suggests competences to assessed at the end of each topic. 
 
The teacher should always keep records of the performance of each of the learners. Progression to a new topic or language area should 
always be done after the learner has shown the readiness to move on. 


--- PAGE 16 ---
5  
 
TERM I 
TOPIC 1: VEHICLE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE 23 periods 
General background 
This topic will enable learners to develop knowledge of crucial vehicle parts and identify tools required in vehicle repair and 
maintenance. Through this topic, learners will also be helped to develop appropriate language related to vehicle repair and 
maintenance. It is hoped that through the various suggested activities, learners will appreciate the need to have well maintained 
vehicles which may in turn reduce accidents caused by vehicles in dangerous mechanical condition. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to use appropriate vocabulary related to vehicle repair and maintenance. 
 
Life skills and indicators 
’éĘ Problem-solving 
- Taking a decision 
- Making a choice 
 
’éĘ Negotiation 
- Using persuasive language 
- Making requests 
 
’éĘ Decision-making 
- Making a choice 
- Asking questions 
 
’éĘ Values 
- Appreciation 
- Trust 
- Patience 


--- PAGE 17 ---
6  
 
 
Sub-topic 1A: Parts of a Vehicle 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The leaner: 
’éĘ Uses the given 
vocabulary to construct 
oral sentences with 
proper pronunciation. 
 
 
’éĘ Uses the present perfect 
tense to make sentences. 
 
 
’éĘ Constructs sentences 
using ŌĆ£mustŌĆØ and ŌĆśmustnŌĆÖt; 
ŌĆ£hasŌĆØ and ŌĆ£haveŌĆØ. 
Vocabulary 
Engine, tyre, steering, wheel, windscreen, driving 
mirror, boot, seat belt, seats, wiper, head lamp, 
indicators, spokes, chain, mud guard, carrier, saddle, 
reflector, brakes, bell, peddle, handle bar. 
 
Grammar 
Use of present perfect tense. 
Use ŌĆśhasŌĆÖ and ŌĆśhaveŌĆÖ 
Use of ŌĆśmustŌĆÖ and mustnŌĆÖt. 
 
Structures 
ŌĆ”must ŌĆ” 
e.g:  You must repair your vehicle. 
ŌĆ”mustnŌĆÖt drive ŌĆ” 
e.g: You mustnŌĆÖt drive with flat tyres. 
ŌĆ” has ŌĆ” 
e.g: Ogule has bought new tyres for his car. 
ŌĆ” have ŌĆ” 
e.g. The children have broken the wind screen of 
Mr. KasoziŌĆÖs car. 
 
- Identifying common parts of a 
vehicle. 
- Describing parts of a vehicle. 
- Constructs sentences about 
parts of a vehicle. 
- Creating stories about parts of 
a vehicle. 
- Using vocabulary and 
structures. 
- Reading and writing texts about 
parts of a vehicle. 
- Drawing and labeling pictures 
to illustrate parts of a vehicle. 
- Spelling words correctly. 


--- PAGE 18 ---
7 
Sub-topic 1B: Equipment used in Vehicle Repair 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Makes sentences using 
the vocabulary related to 
vehicle repair and 
maintenance. 
 
’éĘ Uses conditionals ŌĆ£ifŌĆØ and 
structures to construct 
sentences with 
conditionals. 
 
’éĘ Completes the given 
vocabulary and 
structures. 
’éĘ Constructs their own 
structures using 
conditionals ŌĆ£ifŌĆØ and ŌĆ£in 
orderŌĆØ. 
Vocabulary  
tool box, spanner, screw driver, pliers, hammer, file, 
car jack, saw, grease, oil, sand paper, tester, wire. 
 
Grammar 
Conditionals (if) 
 
Structures 
If ŌĆ” 
e.g. If I want to remove a tyre, I will use a car jack. 
ŌĆ” if ŌĆ” 
e.g. I will buy a spanner tomorrow if I go to town. 
ŌĆ” in order to ŌĆ” 
Kirya used a pair of pliers in order to cut the wire. 
Review this sentence.  Not the best, e.g. could try 
e.g.: In order to get the job done well, you may have 
to use pliers to cut the wire ,,,  
 
- Reading and writing text on 
equipment used in vehicle 
repair and maintenance. 
- Identifying and describing 
equipment used in vehicle 
repair and maintenance. 
- Conducting conversations on 
equipment used in vehicle 
repair and maintenance. 
- Asking and answering 
questions about equipment 
used in vehicle repair and 
maintenance. 
- Spelling words correctly. 
 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses vocabulary related to vehicle repair and maintenance orally. 
’éĘ Reads texts and answers questions on vehicle repair and maintenance. 
’éĘ Writes texts about vehicle repair and maintenance. 


--- PAGE 19 ---
8 
TOPIC 2: PRINT MEDIA 16 periods 
 
 
 
General Background 
This topic is intended to provide learners with adequate language to deal with all forms of print media. It will equip them with adequate 
knowledge and skills to read newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, brochures, and so on. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to use adequate vocabulary used in the print media and shows the desire to read and write articles in the print 
media. 
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Effective communication 
- Fluency 
- Confidence 
- Accuracy 
 
’éĘ Critical thinking 
- Responding to questions appropriately. 
- Analyzing statements. 
- Making the best use of the information you have. 
 
’éĘ Creative thinking 
- Initiating new ideas 
- Logical reasoning 
- Finding different ways of doing things. 
 
’éĘ Values 
- Responsibility 
- Co-operation 
- Sharing 
- Appreciation 


--- PAGE 20 ---
9 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses the given 
vocabulary in sentences. 
 
 
’éĘ Constructs sentences 
using the appropriate 
structures. 
 
 
’éĘ Uses articles, relative 
pronouns and appropriate 
tenses in constructing 
sentences. 
Vocabulary 
Cartoon, puzzle, story, news, announcement, 
advertisement, newspaper, magazine, back page, front 
page, reporter, article, editorial, columnist, editor, 
journalist, column, crossword, media, brochure, pullout, 
newsletter. 
 
Grammar 
Use of articles: a, the, an. 
Relative pronouns. 
Tenses: past, simple, future. 
 
Structures 
The ŌĆ” which ŌĆ” 
e.g. The article which appeared in the newspaper last 
week was sad. 
ŌĆ” anŌĆ” 
e.g: The journalist wrote an interesting story about 
elections. 
ŌĆ” aŌĆ” 
e.g. Mpung is a good columnist. 
ŌĆ” will ŌĆ” 
e.g: The advertisement on games and sports will be in 
the newspapers next week. 
 
- Talking about different 
items related to print 
media. 
- Reading different texts 
related to print media. 
- Writing articles, adverts 
and stories. 
- Asking and answering 
questions in past simple 
and future tense. 
- Spelling words correctly. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
 
The learner: 
’éĘ Listens to and makes oral comments about the print media. 
’éĘ Reads and reports on various print media. 
’éĘ Writes articles on various issues. 


--- PAGE 21 ---
10 
 
 
 
TOPIC 3: TRAVELLING 15 periods 
General Background 
This topic is intended to make learners use language related to travelling. It will enable learners build on knowledge acquired in P.4 
under the topic ŌĆ£Giving DirectionŌĆØ. Learners will develop vocabulary, structures and skills related to travelling. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to use a range of vocabulary and appropriate grammatical structures related to travelling. 
 
Life skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Effective communication 
- Articulation 
- Audibility 
- Confidence 
 
’éĘ Assertiveness 
- Being open 
- Expressing ones point of view 
- Standing in for oneŌĆÖs right 
 
’éĘ Decision-making 
- Making choice 
- Telling consequences of their choices 
 
’éĘ Values 
- Responsibility 
- Keeping time 
- Respect


--- PAGE 22 ---
11 
 
 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Describes different means 
of travel using the given 
vocabulary. 
 
’éĘ Uses the vocabulary and 
grammar given to 
construct sentences using 
proper adverts and 
tenses. 
 
’éĘ Constructs own structures 
using the given grammar. 
Vocabulary 
Further, about, fare, conductor, ticket, seat, cycle, 
speed, fast, reduce, arrive, reach, leave, departure, 
destination, luggage, passenger, travel, taxi, coach, 
by. 
 
Grammar 
- Adverbs. 
- Past continuous tense.  
- Past simple tense. 
 
Structures 
ŌĆ” while ŌĆ” 
e.g. The conductor collected the fare while the taxi 
was moving. 
While ŌĆ” 
e.g. While we were travelling, one of the children 
started crying. 
ŌĆ” often ŌĆ” 
e.g. I often travel by bus to town. 
 
- Acting dialogues on travelling. 
- Reading texts on travelling. 
- Asking and answering 
questions on travel charts. 
- Writing imaginative 
compositions on travelling. 
- Spelling words correctly. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
The learner: 
’éĘ Listens to and comments about various travel reports. 
’éĘ Confidently, talks about various means of travelling. 
’éĘ Reads texts and answers questions on travelling. 
’éĘ Writes simple texts on travelling. 


--- PAGE 23 ---
12 
 
 
 
 
TERM II 
TOPIC 4: LETTER WRITING 10 periods 
General Background 
This topic will enable learners to develop knowledge and skills of writing personal letters. It builds on what was handled in the 
previous topic print media.  It lays a foundation for formal writing which is to be handled in P.7. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to write a variety of personal letters such as seasonal greetings and invitations. 
 
Life skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Effective communication 
- Logical presentation of ideas 
- Accuracy 
 
’éĘ Creative thinking 
- Logical reasoning 
- Innovativeness 
 
’éĘ Critical thinking 
- Selecting and evaluating information. 
- Making best use of the information you have. 
- Analyzing statements. 
 
’éĘ Values 
- Love 
- Appreciation 
- Friendliness 


--- PAGE 24 ---
13 
 
 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies components of 
a personal letter using 
the given vocabulary. 
 
’éĘ Completes sentences 
using the given 
structures. 
 
 
’éĘ Writes letters using the 
acceptable grammar 
rules. 
Vocabulary 
Invite, letter, envelope, address, card, occasion, 
party, guest, host, hostess, ceremony, affectionate, 
sincerely, yours, dear, sender, receiver, writer, 
friend, reply. 
 
Grammar 
- Interjections. 
- Punctuation. 
- Personal pronouns. 
 
Structure 
E.g. Hullo, my friend. 
ŌĆ” would ŌĆ” 
E.g. He would come to our party if we invited him. 
Would...? 
E.g. Would you write a letter to your mother if she 
was sick? 
ŌĆ” couldŌĆ” 
E.g. Maria could write a letter inviting Maggy to a 
birthday party. 
Could ŌĆ”? 
e.g: Could he reply that letter immediately? 
 
- Asking and answering 
questions on personal letters. 
- Reading personal letters. 
- Writing personal letters. 
- Spelling words correctly. 
- Reading texts related to letter 
writing. 
- Writing personal letters. 
 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses oral expressions connected to letter writing. 
’éĘ Reads and answers questions on letters. 
’éĘ Write personal letters using appropriate language. 


--- PAGE 25 ---
14 
TOPIC 5: COMMUNICATION 74 periods 
 
 
 
General Background 
This topic will enable learners to develop the knowledge and skills of giving and receiving information in order to enable them interact 
or communicate with others freely. The topic also consolidates knowledge and skills acquired in the previous topics. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to apply knowledge and skills acquired to communicate effectively using the post office, telephone and email. 
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Effective communication 
- Clarity 
- Accuracy 
- Logically 
 
’éĘ Critical thinking 
- Responding to questions appropriately. 
- Taking decisions. 
- Making best use of the available information. 
 
’éĘ Values 
- Co-operation 
- Appreciation 
- Friendliness 
- Care 


--- PAGE 26 ---
15 
Sub-topic 5A:  The Post Office 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses given vocabulary in 
sentence construction. 
 
 
’éĘ Writes sentences using 
the future tense and 
conjunctions 
appropriately. 
 
 
’éĘ Constructs own sentences 
using the given structures 
as examples. 
’éĘ Completes the given 
structures. 
Vocabulary 
Post, stamp, letter box, directory,, package, money 
order, private box, parcel, telegram, mail, aerogram, 
post office, box, box rental, letter slot, post office, 
registered letter. 
 
Grammar 
- Future tense. 
- Conjunctions. 
 
Structures 
ŌĆ” either ŌĆ” or ŌĆ” 
E.g. Sarah will either send a letter or send a 
telegram. 
ŌĆ” might ŌĆ” 
e.g. She might receive her parcel this evening. 
ŌĆ” unless ŌĆ” 
e.g. Your letter will not be posted unless you fix a 
postage stamp. 
Unless ŌĆ”. 
e.g. Unless you pay for your box rental, it will be 
closed. 
 
- Role playing posting and 
receiving mail. 
- Reading texts related to post 
office. 
- Writing compositions on post 
office. 
- Spelling words correctly. 


--- PAGE 27 ---
16 
Sub-topic 5B:  The Telephone 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses the given 
vocabulary in 
constructing sentences. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Constructs sentences 
using the appropriate 
tenses. 
 
 
’éĘ Completes the given 
structures. 
’éĘ Constructs own 
sentences basing on the 
given structures. 
Vocabulary 
Telephone, mobile telephone, teleface, airtime, 
landline, fixed line, receiver, handset, network mast, 
toxins, telephone directory, dial, airtime, airtime card, 
call, subscriberŌĆÖs identification module (sim) card, 
load. 
 
Grammar 
- Past simple tense. 
- Present simple tense. 
 
Structures 
ŌĆ” enough ŌĆ” to 
e.g. She did not enough have airtime to make a call. 
ŌĆ” need to ŌĆ” 
E.g: You need to fix a landline at home. 
ŌĆ” neednŌĆÖt to ŌĆ” 
E.g. You neednŌĆÖt own two telephones. 
 
- Role playing telephone 
activities 
- Demonstrating how to use a 
telephone. 
- Reading texts about using a 
telephone. 
- Asking and answering 
questions on telephone. 
- Writing texts related to 
telephone. 
- Spelling words correctly. 
 
Sub-topic 5C: The Internet 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses the given 
vocabulary in sentences. 
Vocabulary 
E. mail, website, delete, save, open, scroll, folder, 
surfing, computer, internet caf├®, service fee, virus, 
google, yahoo, search, page, access, sign in, sign 
 
- Acting dialogues and 
conversations on using the 
internet. 


--- PAGE 28 ---
17 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
 
’éĘ Uses the past simple and 
appropriate conjunctions, 
and interrogatives in 
sentences. 
 
 
’éĘ Completes the given 
structures. 
out, log, internet explore, search engine. 
 
Grammar 
- Past simple. 
- Conjunctions. 
- Interrogative, pronoun (who, what, which). 
 
Structures 
ŌĆ” too.. to ŌĆ” 
e.g The internet caf├® was too congested to sit in. 
ŌĆ” in order to ŌĆ” 
e.g I opened the website in order to access my e- 
mail. 
ŌĆ” so as ŌĆ” 
e.g He logged onto yahoo so as to surf news. 
- Reading e-mail messages. 
- Asking and answering 
questions 
- Writing e-mail messages 
- Spelling words correctly 
 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
The learner: 
’éĘ Listens and responds to various expressions on communication. 
’éĘ Reads texts related to the forms of communication. 
’éĘ Writes texts using language related to communication. 
 
 
TOPIC 6: CULTURE 29 periods 
General Background 
This topic will build on what was covered in P.3 (Theme 9: Culture and Gender in Our Sub County). It will provide learners with an 
opportunity to learn and appreciate other peopleŌĆÖs cultures. It will also enable the learners develop vocabulary and structures related to 
culture. 


--- PAGE 29 ---
18 
 
 
 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to develop knowledge on and be able to appreciate, different cultures. 
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Self- awareness. 
- Self-identification 
- Talking about oneŌĆÖs culture 
 
’éĘ Friendship formation 
- Use of polite language 
- Working in groups 
 
’éĘ Assertiveness 
- Being open 
- Giving reasons for action 
- Listening and valuing others 
 
’éĘ Values 
- Respect 
- Love 
- Co-operation 
 
Sub-topic 6A: Nationalities 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses the vocabulary in 
sentences. 
 
’éĘ Uses adjectives and 
Vocabulary 
Ugandan, Tanzanian, Kenyan, Rwandese, 
Sudanese, German, French, English, Scottish, 
American, Brazilian, Chinese, Indian, Japanese. 
 
Grammar 
 
- Acting situational games 
related to nationalities 
- Reading and answering 
questions on nationalities. 
- Writing guided composition on 


--- PAGE 30 ---
19 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
prepositions in 
constructing sentences. 
 
’éĘ Constructs own 
sentences using the 
given grammar. 
Adjectives. 
Prepositions. 
 
Structure 
I am a ŌĆ” 
e.g. I am a Chinese. 
ŌĆ” not a ŌĆ” but ŌĆ” 
e.g. He is not a Ugandan but a Kenyan. 
e.g. Egyptians come from Egypt. 
ŌĆ”ŌĆ”.come fromŌĆ”ŌĆ”. 
e.g. Egyptians come from Egypt. 
 
nationalities. 
- Completing sentences on 
nationalities. 
- Spelling words correctly. 
 
Sub-topic 6B: Languages 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses the vocabulary 
appropriately in 
sentences. 
 
 
’éĘ Uses nouns, the passive 
voice and conditionals (if 
2) in sentence 
construction. 
 
’éĘ Constructs own 
sentences using the 
given grammar. 
Vocabulary 
Luganda, Lumasaba, Runyankitura, Luo, Iteso, Kiswahili, 
French, English, German, Latin, Chinese, Ibo, lingala, 
Kinyanwanda. 
 
Grammar 
Nouns. 
Passive voice. 
Conditionals (if 2). 
 
Structures 
ŌĆ” because ŌĆ” 
e.g. She speaks Lugishu because she comes from 
Bugishu. 
Sentence transformation 
e.g. People in England speak English. 
 
- Acting dialogues and 
conversations related to 
languages. 
- Asks and answers 
questions related to 
languages. 
- Reading different texts 
related to languages 
- Writing imaginative 
composition. 
- Writing sentence 
transformations. 
- Spelling words correctly. 
- Competing the 
structures. 


--- PAGE 31 ---
20 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 English is spoken in England. 
If ŌĆ” would ŌĆ” 
If I were a Nigerian, I would be rich. 
ŌĆ” would ŌĆ” if 
Muyyobo would speak Spanish if she was from Spain. 
ŌĆ” as ŌĆ” 
e.g. Kinyarwanda is for Rwandese as Linganla is for 
Congolese. 
 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Listens and responds to various cultural expressions. 
’éĘ Reads and reacts on various articles about culture. 
’éĘ Writes various texts on nationalities and languages. 


--- PAGE 32 ---
21 
 
 
 
TERM III 
TOPIC 7: PEACE AND SECURITY 15 periods 
 
General background 
This topic will enable learners to develop vocabulary related to peace and security. It will enable them acquire appropriate language 
necessary for harmonious living. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to use the vocabulary and structures related to security and peace in real life situations. 
 
Life skills and indicators 
’éĘ Non ŌĆō violent conflict 
resolution. 
- Resolving issues peacefully. 
- Using appropriate language. 
- Accepting defeat. 
 
’éĘ Negotiation 
- Temper control. 
- Using persuasive language. 
- Apologizing. 
 
’éĘ Interpersonal relationships 
- Forgiving others. 
- Interacting freely. 
 
’éĘ Values 
- Appreciation 
- Care 
- Love 
- Respect 
 
 
- Assisting others to come to an understanding. 
- Reporting bad acts. 
 
 
- Requesting. 
- Thanking. 


--- PAGE 33 ---
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Constructs sentences 
using the given 
vocabulary. 
 
 
’éĘ Uses conjunctions and 
the given tenses 
appropriately. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Uses the given structures 
in sentence construction. 
’éĘ Constructs own 
structures using the given 
grammar. 
Vocabulary 
Peace, security, judge, magistrate, report, statement, 
offense, offend, handcuff, crime, cell, arrest, court, police 
station, police post, army, barracks, case, court, witness, 
defense, gun, arrows. 
 
Grammar 
Conjunctions. 
Past tense (simple). 
Present perfect tense. 
 
Structures 
ŌĆ” so ŌĆ” that ŌĆ” 
e.g.: The village has so many thieves that there is no 
peace. 
ŌĆ” and ŌĆ” 
e.g. The policeman arrested the murderer and took him 
to court. 
ŌĆ” has/have ŌĆ” 
e.g. Okumu has given his statement to the police 
ŌĆ” about ŌĆ” 
e.g.: The witnesses have given their statements about 
the case. 
 
- Acting conversations and 
dialogues. 
- Reading stories. 
- Telling and retelling stories. 
- Asking and answering 
questions. 
- Writing guided 
compositions. 
- Drawing scenes related to 
peace and security. 
- Spelling words correctly. 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Listens and reads stories about peace and security. 
’éĘ Reads texts about peace and security. 
’éĘ Writes/draws scenes about peace and security. 


--- PAGE 34 ---
23 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC 8: SERVICES (BANKING) 16 periods 
General Background 
This topic will build on what was covered in P.3 (Theme 7 under Managing Resources).  It will enable learners develop the basic 
language and skills related to banking which will be used in real life situations. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to apply the knowledge and skills acquired in real life situations. 
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Decision making 
- Making choices 
- Asking questions 
- Giving instructions 
 
’éĘ Negotiation 
- Requesting 
- Thanking 
 
’éĘ Values 
- Appreciation. 
- Patient. 
 
 
- Coping with stress 
- Being patient 
- Accepting advice 
 
 
 
 
 
- Endurance. 
- Responsibility. 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses the given 
vocabulary in sentences. 
Vocabulary 
Bank, bank manager, Pass-book, bank-book, teller 
deposit withdraw, credit, save, safe, balance, account, 
bank statement, bounce, cheque forge, cashier, 
withdraw, form, deposit form, ATM card, machine, 
cheque book, savings, account, money. 
 
- Describing process of 
banking 
- Role playing banking 
situations. 
- Acting dialogues and 
conversations on banking. 


--- PAGE 35 ---
24 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
’éĘ Uses conjunctions and 
the given tenses in 
sentences. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Completes sentences 
using the given 
structures. 
’éĘ Constructs own 
sentences using the 
given grammar. 
Grammar 
- Conjunctions. 
- Past simple tense. 
- Future tense. 
- Present simple tense. 
 
Structures 
 
Neither ŌĆ” nor ŌĆ” 
e.g.  Neither is he a Manager nor a cashier at that bank 
ŌĆ” neither ŌĆ” nor ŌĆ” 
Wafula will neither withdraw nor deposit money to day. 
ŌĆ” as soon as ŌĆ” 
E.g. The cashier gave Akello money as soon as she 
presented the withdraw form. 
As  soon as ŌĆ” 
E.g. As soon as Apio gave in the account number, the 
bank manager told him his balance. 
- Reading and interpreting 
information related to 
banking. 
- Writing and completing 
texts spelling words 
correctly. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
The learner: 
’éĘ Uses vocabulary related to banking. 
’éĘ Reads and answers questions related to banking. 
’éĘ Writes texts related to banking. 


--- PAGE 36 ---
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrated Science 


--- PAGE 37 ---
26 
 
 
 
 
Background 
This is Primary Five Science Syllabus. In Primary 1 -3 learning is based on themes, learning outcomes and competences. Most of the 
Science related competences are covered under the literacy strands of the Thematic Curriculum. In Primary Four learning was based 
on subjects and the Science Syllabus outlined learning outcomes, content and language competences. 
 
Learners in Primary Five are expected to have developed sufficient basic literacy skills both  in local and English language. The 
teacher can now use English only as a medium of instruction. The teacher is required to check from time to time if learners understand 
the concepts correctly and are able to consolidate what was acquired in earlier classes. 
 
The instructional process will follow what was in the old syllabus and teachers will be required to use the old instructional materials. 
 
 
Rationale 
This revised Primary Five (P5) Science syllabus has been designed to consolidate the basic literacy an d numeracy skills acquired 
during the Thematic Curriculum and the transition year. It is also intended to provide the learner with knowledge on basic sc ience, 
health, agriculture and environmental knowledge, skills, attitudes, practice and values important to prepare learners for upper classes. 
 
The main changes which have been made in this Primary Five syllabus are: 
- Topic overflows from P4 e.g. the Digestive Systems and measurements have been included. Topics like Primary Health Care, part 
of Digestive System from has been simplified and is presented for P5. These are shown in the matrix below on topic shifts. 
- Contents in some topics have been reduced in order to keep the learning experience light and simple. The more complex content 
has been shifted to upper classes while others have been redesigned to suit P5 learnersŌĆÖ level. 
- The scope and sequencing of content has been based on progression of outcomes and competences. 
- Literacy skills and Language competences have been included in each topic to clarify concepts. 
- Possible life skills which can be developed have been suggested in each topic. 
- Subject competences and language competences have been included to replace objectives. These are arranged in   order of 
cognitive levels namely knowledge, comprehension and application. 
- Language competences have been included especially to reinforce literacy skills and to help clarify concepts. 
- General outcomes instead of aims and objectives have been provided for each topic. 
- The background for each topic has been given together with other necessary guidance to the teacher on how to handle the topic. 


--- PAGE 38 ---
27 
 
 
 
General Methodology 
It is strongly suggested that the teacher uses those methods and activities which put the learner at the centre of the teachi ng/learning 
process. The active verbs used in expressing the learning competences are all directed to the learner. This implies that as a result of 
teaching/learning process, the learner should exhibit these competences. 
 
The teacher of Integrated Science is expected to use a variety of books of the old curriculum. This will not enrich teachers content but 
will help the teacher to prepare the correct contents on the topics.  The teacher is expected to constantly help relate science to real life 
situations and experiences. Not all schoo ls in Uganda may have same learning environment. The teacher should feel free to use 
examples which provide the learner with the opportunity to acquire the same knowledge, concepts, skills, values and competences. 
 
The methods a teacher chooses to use shou ld be those which contribute towards the achievement of competences, learning 
outcomes and eventually lead to the achievements of aims and objectives of primary education.  Such methods therefore, should 
cater for the spiral nature of the science syllabus.  At Primary Four the topics introduced and content covered should pave way for 
further study of the topics in upper classes. Primary four class will be useful in preparing learners for effective participating in P5-7. 
 
Assessment Guidelines 
In principle continuous assessment is recommended and should be based on the summarized competences suggested in each topic. 
All assessments of learning shall be based on the learning competences given in this syllabus. Besides the Continuous Assessm ent, 
there shall be end of term and end of year assessment carried out and records kept. 
 
General Learning Outcomes 
When the learners go through this syllabus they will be able to: 
’éĘ Survey, identify and distinguish the attributes of plants, animals, other objects and conditions in the environment. 
’éĘ Use characteristics to compare and classify animals, plants and other objects in the environment. 
’éĘ Identify the features and describe the functions of different parts of the human body. 
’éĘ Take care of the different parts of their bodies and practice good health habits. 
’éĘ Keep safe and avoid accidents. 
’éĘ Understand the conditions for proper growth of living things. 
’éĘ Apply correct scientific processes in investigations of various phenomena. 
’éĘ Show knowledge of and take care of the environment for its sustainable use. 


--- PAGE 39 ---
28 
 
 
 
P5 Integrated Science Topic Outline 
 
Themes or Unit Topic No. of periods 
Theme 7: Science in Human activities and occupation Keeping Poultry and Bees 22 
Theme 5: Matter and Energy Measurement 8 
Theme 1: The Environment Components of the environment: The Soil 18 
Theme 2: Human Health Immunization 20 
Theme 4: The Human Body The Digestive System 10 
Theme 5: Matter and Energy Heat Energy 20 
Theme 7: Science in Human activities and occupation Occupation in our community: Crop growing 12 
Theme 3: The world of living things Bacteria and Fungi 10 
Theme 6: Managing changes in the Environment Types of Change ŌĆō Biological, physical and 
chemical 
12 
Theme 7: Science in Human activities and occupation Keeping goats, sheep and pigs 24 
Theme 2: Human Health Food and Nutrition 12 
Theme 2: Human Health Primary Health Care and Family Care 12 


--- PAGE 40 ---
29 
 
 
 
TERM I 
THEME:  SCIENCE IN HUMAN ACTIVITIES AND OCCUPATIONS 
Topic:          Keeping Poultry and Bees 
General Background 
Keeping poultry and bees is a ver y important topic which helps learners to develop interest and basic skills for managing simple 
projects like poultry and bee keeping for self reliance. It is important to note that this topic will help learners to apprec iate poultry and 
bee farming as a business.  This topic has been retained from the old syllabus. 
 
Learning Outcome 
-    The learner is able to know and use basic scientific knowledge and skills in the management of poultry and bees. 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies different types of 
poultry. 
 
’éĘ Describes the external 
parts of a domestic fowl. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies the different 
types of chicken. 
 
’éĘ Describes the breeds of 
chicken. 
’éĘ Explains the uses of 
poultry. 
’éĘ Describes the systems of 
keeping poultry: chicken. 
 
’éĘ Names the different types 
of poultry. 
’éĘ Labels with correct spelling 
a diagram showing the 
external parts of a 
domestic fowl. 
’éĘ Correctly reads words and 
sentences on poultry. 
’éĘ Listens to stories about 
poultry farming as a 
business. 
’éĘ Recites rhymes about 
poultry farming. 
’éĘ Writes words, sentences 
and stories about keeping 
chicken. 
 
’éĘ Types of poultry 
(chicken, turkey, guinea 
fowls, ducks, pigeons). 
’éĘ External features of a 
domestic fowl (male and 
female) 
- comb, beak, wing, 
legs, feathers, claws, 
wattle, scales 
’éĘ Types of chicken 
- broilers 
- layers 
’éĘ Breeds of chicken 
 
 
’éĘ Systems of keeping 
poultry (chicken) 
 
’éĘ Naming types of 
poultry. 
’éĘ Describing the different 
types of poultry. 
’éĘ Drawing the external 
structure of a hen. 
’éĘ Labelling the different 
parts of a hen. 
’éĘ Naming different types 
of chicken. 
’éĘ Describing breeds of 
chicken. 
’éĘ Explaining uses of 
poultry farming. 
’éĘ Describing the systems 
of keeping poultry: 
chicken. 


--- PAGE 41 ---
30 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
’éĘ Explains how to manage a 
poultry farm. 
 - Free range, deep litter, 
fold pen, battery 
’éĘ Management of poultry: 
chicken 
- Proper feeding, 
housing, pest and 
disease control and 
treatment e.g. spraying 
and vaccination. 
’éĘ Explaining how to 
manage a poultry farm 
’éĘ Describes the life history 
of bees 
’éĘ States the different types 
of bees. 
’éĘ States the importance of 
bees. 
 
’éĘ Explains the condition 
and reasons for 
swarming. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies the types of bee 
hives. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes the different 
’éĘ Spells the words correctly. 
 
’éĘ Reads stories and poems 
about the importance of 
bee farming. 
 
’éĘ Writes stories about bee 
farming. 
 
’éĘ Draws and labels the life 
cycle of bees. 
’éĘ Types of bees 
- drones, workers, 
queen. 
’éĘ Importance of bees to 
plants and people. 
- pollination, honey, bee 
wax, propolis. 
’éĘ Conditions and reasons 
for swarming 
- leakage in the hive, 
excessive heat, attack 
by enemies, bad smell, 
noise, looking for a 
new hive. 
’éĘ Types of hives 
- Traditional bee hive 
e.g. Kigezi, dug out 
log, tin, 
- Modern bee hives e.g. 
box hive, top bar hive. 
’éĘ Harvesting honey 
’éĘ Naming different types 
of bees. 
’éĘ Describing the life 
history of bees. 
’éĘ Drawing and labelling 
the life cycle of bees. 
’éĘ Stating the importance 
of bees. 
’éĘ Discussing the 
conditions and reasons 
for swarming. 
’éĘ Identifying the types of 
bee hives. 
’éĘ Describing the different 
methods of harvesting 
honey. 
’éĘ Spelling, reading and 
writing words, 
sentences and stories 
about bee farming. 


--- PAGE 42 ---
31 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
methods of harvesting 
honey. 
’éĘ Explains the importance 
of bee farming as a 
business. 
 -  Traditional and 
modern methods 
’éĘ Bee farming as a business 
-  Money, food, candles, 
plastics, employment. 
 
 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Effective communication. 
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Creative thinking. 
’éĘ Problem-solving. 
’éĘ Decision making. 
’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Concern 
’éĘ Appreciation 
’éĘ Love 
’éĘ Patience 
’éĘ Fluency 
1. Name the different types of poultry. 
2. Describe the conditions and reasons for bee swarming. 
3. Explain the importance of poultry and bee farming as a 
business. 
 
 
THEME:   MATTER AND ENERGY 
Topic:          Measurement 
General Background 
This topic should be used for increasing the learnerŌĆÖs skills of taking accurate measurements with the correct units and usin g different 
instruments and apparatus. The teacher should show the relationship between mass and weight between capacit y and volume. The 
language of measuring must be used correctly with demonstrations to explain the meanings; as well as such as heavy and light,  big 
and small, floating and sinking. The topic is a preparation for the future lessons on energy and so should b e carefully taught with 
learners doing experiments. The teacher should relate this topic with what is taught in Mathematics. This topic is an overflo w from P4 
Term Two. 
 
Learning Outcome 


--- PAGE 43 ---
32 
 
 
 
The learner is able to know standard units for measuring mass, weight and volume and use correct instruments to measure mass, 
weight and volume. 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ States the different 
measurements of objects. 
 
 
’éĘ Explains the need for 
standard measures of 
mass, weight and volume. 
 
 
’éĘ Uses the correct 
instruments and apparatus 
to take measurements. 
 
’éĘ Talks about measuring 
different objects and uses 
the correct English words 
to compare measurements. 
’éĘ Spells the words correctly. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Reads and writes scientific 
units used for measuring 
correctly. 
 
1. Measuring 
- Mass and weight. 
- Capacity and volume. 
 
2. Behavior of objects with 
water 
- Floating and sinking 
- Displacement 
methods 
3. Finding density of different 
objects in relation to mass 
and volume. 
 
’éĘ Comparing different 
objects by mass, weight 
and volume. 
’éĘ Carrying out 
experiments on floating 
and sinking. 
’éĘ Measuring mass, weight 
and volume using 
standard measures and 
correct instruments. 
’éĘ Using the correct units of 
measure in different 
situations. 
’éĘ Finding densities of 
different objects. 
 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Effective communication. 
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Decision-making. 
’éĘ Coping with emotions. 
’éĘ Coping with stress. 
’éĘ Problem-solving. 
’éĘ Fluency 
’éĘ Confidence 
’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Taking decisions 
’éĘ Logic 
’éĘ Endurance 
’éĘ Prediction 
’éĘ Sympathy 
’éĘ Care 
1. Name the different units used when measuring various 
objects. 
2. Explain why objects float or sink in water. 
3. Measure mass, weight and volume of different objects. 


--- PAGE 44 ---
33 
 
 
 
THEME:   HUMAN HEALTH 
Topic:          Immunisation 
General background 
Many childrenŌĆÖs lives have perished due to diseases we could easily avoid. Learners should be made aware of the ways of preventing 
the deadly childhood diseases. Immunization is an important and most effective means of protecting the young from the killer 
diseases. The learners should therefore be vigilantly made to appreciate and take part in the immunization activities. This topic has 
been retained but taken from Term Two to Term One. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to develop more knowledge on immunization, appreciate the importance of immunizations and actively take part in 
the immunization activities. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the different 
types of immunity. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Explain the importance of 
immunity. 
 
’éĘ Identifies different 
vaccines and relates them 
to the immunisable 
diseases. 
 
’éĘ Talks about different 
types of immunity. 
’éĘ Spells the relevant 
words correctly. 
’éĘ Sings songs about 
immunization. 
’éĘ Reads and writes words 
and sentences and 
stories about 
immunization. 
’éĘ Recites poems about 
immunization. 
 
1. Immunity 
- What it is 
- Types of immunity 
o Natural 
o Acquired 
2. Importance of immunity 
 
 
3. Immunisable childhood diseases 
- Polio 
- Tuberculosis 
- Diphtheria 
- Measles 
- Whooping cough 
- Tetanus 
- Hepatitis B 
- Hemophilia influenza 
 
’éĘ Naming different 
vaccines. 
’éĘ Identifying different 
immunisable 
diseases. 
’éĘ Matching disease to 
vaccines. 
’éĘ Describing treatment 
and preventive 
measures. 
’éĘ Identifies different 
ways of administering 
vaccines. 
’éĘ Discussing signs and 
causes. 


--- PAGE 45 ---
34 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
’éĘ Identifies signs and 
  
4. 
 
 
5. 
 
 
6. 
 
 
 
7. 
 
 
8. 
 
Causes, spread, signs and 
symptoms and effects. 
 
Vaccines 
- What they are. 
- Storage 
Types of vaccines 
- Measles vaccine 
- Polio vaccine 
- DPT 
- BCG, Hep B. Heb 
Administration of vaccines 
- Orally 
- By injection. 
Other immunisable diseases 
- Cholera 
- Yellow fever 
- Meningitis 
- Signs and symptoms and 
effects of other immunisable 
diseases. 
 
symptoms of different 
immunisable diseases. 
’éĘ Identifies other 
immunisable diseases. 
’éĘ Relates the vaccines to 
diseases. 
 
’éĘ Identifies immunization 
centres in the area. 
’éĘ Describes treatment for 
immunisable diseases. 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities  
’éĘ Problem-solving. 
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Effective communication. 
’éĘ Self-awareness. 
’éĘ Empathy. 
’éĘ Decision-making. 
’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Taking decisions 
’éĘ Fluency 
’éĘ Concern 
’éĘ Confidence 
’éĘ Sympathy 
1. Name the childhood immunisable diseases. 
2. Describe the signs and symptoms of the childhood 
immunisable diseases. 
3. Explain the importance of immunization. 


--- PAGE 46 ---
35 
 
 
 
THEME:   HUMAN BODY 
Topic:          The Digestive System 
General background 
Learners now know the major organs of the body and their locations. The teacher should make sure that learners understand tha t the 
digestive system consists of different o rgans with different functions. You should relate digestive diseases with diarrhoea diseases 
learnt in Primary Four. This topic should be used for increasing skills of good feeding habits in order to have a healthy dig estive 
system.  This topic is an overflow from P4 term 3 and also taken from P7 Term 1 and merged. 
 
Learning outcome 
- The learner acquires knowledge about the organs of the digestive system and what happens to food within the system. 
- Appreciate the importance of the digestive organs of the human body. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains what the 
digestive system is. 
 
’éĘ Identifies parts of the 
digestive system. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes the functions 
of the different parts of 
the digestive system. 
 
’éĘ Describes the signs and 
symptoms of diseases 
and disorders of the 
digestive system. 
 
’éĘ Names the different parts 
of the digestive system. 
 
’éĘ Spells the words correctly. 
 
’éĘ Recites rhymes about the 
different parts of the 
system. 
 
’éĘ Reads words, sentences 
and stories about the 
digestive system. 
 
’éĘ Draws and labels the 
different parts of the 
digestive system. 
 
1. Digestive system 
- What it is. 
 
2. Parts of the digestive system 
- The alimentary canal 
(mouth, aesophagus, 
stomach, small and large 
intestines). 
 
3. Functions of the different 
parts of the digestive system. 
 
4. Diseases and disorders of the 
digestive system. 
- Causes 
- Signs and symptoms. 
 
’éĘ Naming the different 
parts of the digestive 
system. 
 
’éĘ Spelling the words 
correctly. 
 
’éĘ Reciting rhymes about 
parts of the digestive 
system. 
 
’éĘ Reading words, 
sentences and stories 
about the parts of the 
digestive system. 
 
’éĘ Drawing and labeling the 


--- PAGE 47 ---
36 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
’éĘ Demonstrates 
behaviours and habits of 
maintaining  the 
efficiency of the digestive 
system. 
  
 
5. Prevention and management 
of diseases and disorders of 
the digestive system. 
 
6. Behavior and habits of 
maintaining the efficiency of 
the system. 
different parts of the 
digestive system. 
’éĘ Discussing ways of 
prevention and 
management of diseases 
and disorders of the 
digestive system. 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities  
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Self-awareness. 
’éĘ Problem-solving. 
’éĘ Decision-making. 
’éĘ Empathy. 
’éĘ Logic 
’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Taking decisions 
’éĘ Concern 
’éĘ Care 
1. Name the different parts of the digestive system. 
2. Describe the functions of the different parts of the digestive 
system. 
3. Draw and label the different parts of the digestive system. 


--- PAGE 48 ---
37 
 
 
 
TERM II 
THEME: THE ENVIRONMENT 
Topic: Components of the Environment ŌĆ£SoilŌĆØ 
 
General background 
The environment is not a n ew theme. At this level learners should be guided to study soil which is a major component of the 
environment. Soil is composed of many living and non -living substances which makes things to co -exist. The learners should be 
helped to find out how soil help s people to survive and its relationship with other components of the environment. Experiments should 
be carried out to find the components of soil.  This topic existed here and has been retained. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to: 
- Recognize causes of soil degradation. 
- Demonstrate good practices of conserving and protecting soil. 
- Appreciate the importance of soil in nature. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the different 
types of soil. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes the different 
ways soil is formed. 
 
 
’éĘ Investigates to show 
properties of different 
soils. 
 
’éĘ Names the types of soil. 
 
’éĘ Describes the components 
of soil. 
 
’éĘ Recites poems and 
rhymes about soil. 
 
’éĘ Sings songs about soil. 
 
’éĘ Reads words, sentences 
and stories about soil. 
 
’éĘ Writes words, sentences 
 
1. Soil 
- What it is 
- Types of soil 
o Loam 
o Clay 
o Sand 
 
2. Soil formation 
- Weathering of rock 
- Decomposition of matter 
 
3. Components of soil 
- Rock / soil particles 
(mineral) 
- Air 
 
’éĘ Identifying types of 
soil. 
 
’éĘ Describing the different 
types of soil. 
 
 
’éĘ Experimenting to show 
the properties of the 
soil. 
 
’éĘ Describing the 
components of soil. 


--- PAGE 49 ---
38 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
 
 
’éĘ Analyses the importance 
of soil. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes the types and 
causes of soil erosion. 
 
 
 
’éĘ States the effects of 
harmful materials on soil. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Demonstrates methods 
of soil conservation. 
 
 
’éĘ Discusses ways of 
improving soil fertility. 
and stories about soil. - Water 
- Humus / organic matter 
- Living things (e.g. 
bacteria, fungi) 
 
4. Importance of soil 
- Plant growth 
- Construction 
- Pottery 
- Home for animals 
- Source of minerals 
 
5. Soil erosion 
- What it is 
- Types of erosion 
- Causes of erosion 
- Agents of erosion 
 
6. Effects of harmful materials on 
soil 
- Broken glasses / tins 
- Plastics 
- Polythene 
- Chemicals / oils 
 
7. Soil conservation 
- What it is 
- Methods of soil 
conservation 
 
8. Soil fertility 
- What it is 
 
 
 
’éĘ Discussing the 
importance of soil. 
 
’éĘ Describing the types 
and causes of soil 
erosion. 
 
’éĘ Stating the effects of 
harmful materials on 
soil. 
 
’éĘ Practicing methods of 
soil conservation. 
 
’éĘ Discussing ways of 
improving soil fertility. 
 
’éĘ Investigating the 
advantages and 
disadvantages of 
artificial fertilizers and 
manure. 
 
’éĘ Making compost 
manure. 
 
’éĘ Describing the various 
components of soil. 


--- PAGE 50 ---
39 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Investigates the 
advantages and 
disadvantages of 
artificial fertilizers and 
manure. 
 
’éĘ Demonstrates best ways 
of making compost 
manure. 
 - Ways of improving soil 
fertility. 
- Artificial fertilizers (in- 
organic). 
- Natural fertilizers (organic) 
e.g. 
o Compost manure 
o Farm yard manure 
o Green manure 
o Organic mulches 
 
9. Advantages and 
disadvantages of artificial and 
natural fertilizers (manure). 
 
 
10. Making compost manure 
(project). 
 
’éĘ Discussing the 
importance of soil. 
’éĘ Participating in making 
compost manure. 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Decision-making. 
’éĘ Effective communication. 
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Logic 
’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Responsibility 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Name the different types of soil. 
Describe the components of soil. 
Discuss the methods of conserving soil. 
’éĘ Problem-solving. ’éĘ Taking decisions   
 ’éĘ Appreciation   


--- PAGE 51 ---
40 
 
 
 
THEME:   MATTER AND ENERGY 
Topic:          Heat Energy 
General Background 
Learners have been introduced to matter and energy in Term I.  They learnt terms like mass, volume and density.  You sho uld build 
on what they learnt to introduce states of matter and forms of energy. Guide learners to identify the difference between types a nd 
forms of energy. Heat is a very essential form of energy in our day to day life.  It provides optimum warmth for pl ant and animal 
growth. Many changes essential for the survival of the ecosystem. Learners should practically be exposed to the effects of heat in 
matter. This will enhance the understanding of their own environment and get ways of manipulating it and hence  improving their lives. 
This topic existed in Term ŌĆ” but has been taken to Term Two. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to use basic scientific knowledge on effects of heat on things in the environment and demonstrate skills of 
investigating effects of heat on matter. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Analyses what matter is. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Investigates the three 
states of matter. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Differentiates between 
 
’éĘ Describes matter and its 
characteristics. 
 
’éĘ Role plays on transfer of 
heat. 
 
’éĘ Spells the words correctly. 
 
’éĘ Reads words, sentences 
and stories about heat 
energy. 
 
’éĘ Writes short stories on 
forms of energy. 
’éĘ Draws and labels the 
 
1. Matter 
’éĘ What it is 
’éĘ Weight / mass 
’éĘ Properties of matter 
(experiments) 
- Has weight/mass 
- Occupies space 
- Exerts pressure 
2. States of matter 
’éĘ Solid 
’éĘ Liquids 
’éĘ Gases 
 
3. Solutes, solvents and 
 
’éĘ Naming different sates 
of matter. 
 
’éĘ Experimenting mixing 
and separating 
mixtures. 
’éĘ Describing types and 
forms of energy. 
 
’éĘ Carrying out activities / 
experiments that show 
effects of heat on 
matter. 
 
’éĘ Drawing and labeling 


--- PAGE 52 ---
41 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
solutes and solvents. 
’éĘ Identifies the differences 
between types and forms 
of energy. 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies different 
sources of heat. 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes the effects of 
heat on matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Investigates methods of 
heat transfer. 
different types of 
thermometers. 
solutions. 
4. Energy 
’éĘ What it is. 
’éĘ Types of energy 
- Kinetic energy 
- Potential energy 
 
5. Forms of energy e.g. heat, 
sound, electric, magnetism, 
light (no details of each 
needed) 
’éĘ Characteristics of forms of 
energy (make work 
possible, transformation). 
 
6. Heat energy 
’éĘ What it is 
’éĘ Sources of heat e.g. sun, 
food, candle light; hot flat 
iron, hot charcoal, burning 
wood or coal, etc. 
’éĘ Uses of heat e.g. cook, 
dry food, dry clothes, 
warm things. 
 
7. Effects of heat gain and loss 
’éĘ Change of size / length 
’éĘ Expansion (experiments 
on the expansion) 
’éĘ Contraction (experiments 
on contraction) 
thermometers. 
’éĘ Measuring 
temperatures. 
 
’éĘ Mixing and separating 
mixtures. 
 
’éĘ Working out sums that 
involve conversions in 
┬║C and ┬║F. 
 
’éĘ Disusing what energy is 
(the concept of energy). 
 
’éĘ Drawing and labelling 
different thermometers. 
 
’éĘ Discussing the effects 
of heat on matter. 
 
’éĘ Explaining of heat in 
our everyday 
experiences. 
 
’éĘ Practicing measuring 
temperature correctly. 
 
’éĘ Drawing the different 
thermometers correctly. 


--- PAGE 53 ---
42 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ States the difference 
between heat energy 
and temperature. 
 
 
’éĘ Relates heat to 
temperature. 
 
’éĘ Explains the types and 
uses of the thermometer. 
 ’éĘ Change of state e.g. 
melting, evaporation, 
freezing, condensation, 
sublimation. 
’éĘ Increase in temperature 
’éĘ Heat transfer (how heat 
travels) 
’éĘ Conduction in solids 
’éĘ Convection in liquids and 
gases 
’éĘ Radiation in vacuum 
 
8. Uses of different methods of 
heat transfer in our 
surrounding e.g. 
’éĘ The thermos flask 
’éĘ The charcoal stove 
 
9. Heat and temperature 
’éĘ What temperature is 
 
10. Thermometers and measure 
of temperature 
’éĘ Types and uses of 
thermometers 
’éĘ Celsius scale 
’éĘ Fahrenheit scale 
’éĘ SixŌĆÖs (Minimum and 
Maximum) 
’éĘ The clinical thermometer 
’éĘ Differences between 
 


--- PAGE 54 ---
43 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
’éĘ Converts degrees 
appropriately. 
 different thermometers. 
 
11. Conversion from degree 
Celsius to Fahrenheit and 
vice versa. 
 
 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Effective communication. 
’éĘ Problem-solving. 
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Cooperation 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Describe the characteristics of different states of matter. 
Explain how heat energy affects the environment. 
Draw and label the different types of thermometers. 
’éĘ Decision-making. ’éĘ Confidence   
’éĘ Creative thinking. ’éĘ Logic   
 ’éĘ Taking decisions   
 ’éĘ Making right choices   
 
 
THEME:  SCIENCE IN HUMAN ACTIVITIES AND OCCUPATIONS 
Topic:          Occupations in Our Community: Crop Growing 
General background 
Learners already have the basic knowledge and skills about the growing of crops in general. In this topic the teacher is required to 
guide the learners on how to grow and care for the common tuber crops in their locality and select one for a sample study. 
It is important to note that exposing learners to seeing, feeling, smelling and other practical activities enhances understan ding and 
development of the concepts and skills you intend to develop in learners. This topic existed  in Term Three but has been brought to 
Term Two. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to show knowledge about common tuber crops, demonstrate growing tuber crops and appreciate the importance of 
proper harvesting, processing and storing tuber crops. 


--- PAGE 55 ---
44 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the 
characteristics of common 
tuber crops. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Discusses ways of 
growing and caring for 
tuber crops. 
’éĘ Identifies pests and 
diseases of tuber crops. 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes the 
characteristics of common 
tuber crop pests and their 
effects on crops. 
 
 
’éĘ Discusses methods of 
controlling pests and 
diseases of tuber crops. 
 
’éĘ Names the common tuber 
crops. 
’éĘ Describes ways of caring 
for tuber crops. 
’éĘ Recites rhymes about the 
growing and caring for 
tuber crops. 
’éĘ Reads words, sentences 
and stories about the 
growing and caring for 
tuber crops. 
’éĘ Writes words, sentences 
and stories about the 
growing and caring for 
tuber crops. 
 
1. Common tuber crops 
’éĘ Root tubers 
- sweet potatoes 
- carrots 
- turnips 
- cassava 
’éĘ Stem tubers 
- Irish potatoes and 
yams 
 
2. Growing and caring for 
tuber crops. 
 
3. Common pests and 
diseases of tuber crops. 
’éĘ Characteristics of 
common tuber crop 
pests. 
’éĘ Effects of pests and 
diseases on tuber 
crops: 
- Rotting of tubers 
- Holes on tubers 
and leaves 
- Leaf yellowing 
- Leaf curling, etc. 
 
4. Methods of controlling 
pests and diseases of 
tuber crops. 
 
’éĘ Identifying the common 
tuber crops. 
’éĘ Naming tuber crops. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Discussing the ways of 
growing and caring for 
tuber crops. 
’éĘ Describing the 
characteristics of 
common tuber crop 
pests. 
’éĘ Discussing the effects of 
pests and diseases on 
tuber crops. 
’éĘ Discussing methods of 
controlling pests and 
diseases of tuber crops. 
’éĘ Describing ways of 
harvesting, processing 
and storing of tuber 
crops. 
’éĘ Practicing the growing of 
tuber crops as a project. 


--- PAGE 56 ---
45 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
’éĘ Describes ways of 
harvesting, processing 
and storing tuber crops. 
 
’éĘ Practices the growing of 
tuber crops (project by the 
Young FarmerŌĆÖs Club). 
  
5. Harvesting, processing 
and storage of tuber 
crops. 
 
6. Science oriented clubs 
- Young FarmersŌĆÖ 
Club 
’éĘ Discussing the effects of 
pests and diseases on 
tuber crops. 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Effective communication 
’éĘ Creative thinking. 
’éĘ Decision-making. 
’éĘ Problem-solving. 
’éĘ Fluency 
’éĘ Confidence 
’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Appreciation 
’éĘ Making right choices 
’éĘ Taking decisions 
’éĘ Care 
1. Name the different types of tuber crops. 
2. Describe the ways of growing and caring for tuber crops. 
3. Discuss the ways of harvesting, processing and storing 
tuber crops. 
 
THEME:   THE WORLD OF LIVING THINGS 
Topic:          Bacteria and Fungi 
General background 
Learners are already aware of germs as disease agents. In this topic, the teacher is supported to create awareness in learner s about 
bacteria and fungi as disease age nts. It is also important to note that some bacteria and fungi are useful to our day -to-day life 
experiences. Practical opportunity if possible should be availed to the learners to observe samples of bacteria and fungi und er the 
microscope.  This topic existed in Term Three but has been brought to Term Two. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to use scientific knowledge and skills about bacteria and fungi as disease agents and how they can be used to 
solve problems of everyday experiences. 


--- PAGE 57 ---
46 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Describes bacteria, 
where they are found 
and where they breed. 
 
 
’éĘ Describes characteristics 
of bacteria. 
 
 
’éĘ Discusses ways of 
preventing, controlling 
and treating bacterial 
diseases. 
 
’éĘ Describes fungi as 
harmless and harmful 
organisms. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies dangers of 
fungi. 
’éĘ Discusses ways of 
preventing and 
controlling bacteria and 
fungal diseases. 
 
’éĘ Describes bacteria / fungi, 
where they are found and 
where they breed. 
’éĘ Acts a dialogue on useful 
and harmful bacteria / 
fungi. 
’éĘ Reads words, sentences 
and stories about bacteria 
and fungi. 
’éĘ Writes words, sentences 
and stories about bacteria 
and fungi. 
 
1. Bacteria 
’éĘ What they are. 
’éĘ Where they are found. 
’éĘ Where they breed. 
 
2. Nature of bacteria 
’éĘ Harmful 
’éĘ Useful / harmless 
 
3. Prevention, control and 
treatment of bacterial diseases. 
 
4. Fungi 
’éĘ What they are. 
’éĘ Where they are found 
’éĘ Examples of fungi 
- Harmful 
- Harmless / useful 
’éĘ Uses of fungi (mushroom 
for food, mould for penicillin 
drug, in brewing). 
 
5. Dangers of fungi. 
 
6. Prevention and control of 
diseases caused by fungi. 
 
7. Facts about bacteria and fungi. 
 
’éĘ Describing bacteria and 
fungi, where they are 
found and where they 
breed. 
’éĘ Describing bacterial and 
fungi as harmful and 
harmless organisms. 
’éĘ Discussing ways of 
preventing, controlling and 
treating bacteria and 
fungal diseases. 
’éĘ Comparing bacteria to 
fungi. 


--- PAGE 58 ---
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Creative thinking. 
’éĘ Decision-making. 
’éĘ Coping with emotions. 
’éĘ Coping with stress. 
’éĘ Effective communication. 
’éĘ Sympathy 
’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Taking decisions 
’éĘ Logic 
’éĘ Concern 
’éĘ Fluency 
’éĘ Responsibility 
1. Name the forms of bacteria and fungi. 
2. State the uses of bacteria and fungi. 
3. Describe ways of preventing, controlling and treating 
bacteria and fungal diseases. 


--- PAGE 59 ---
48 
 
 
 
TERM III 
 
THEME 5:       MANAGING CHANGES IN THE ENVIRONMENT 
Topic 1: Types of Changes ŌĆō Biological, Physical and Chemical Changes 
General background 
There are many changes that happen to living organisms as they grow. Changes also happen to other things in the environment and 
the atmosphere. 
In P4 the learners learnt about changes in the water cycle. They also learnt about changes caused by heat to different things  in the 
environment. You build on what has been learnt to guide learners to understand the different changes like those  they ma y  
experience. Child growth and monitoring cards should be used to develop an understanding of biological changes. Note that phy sical 
and chemical changes happen in our environment now and then. You should focus on daily experiences which are familiar and which 
the learners can easily learn from.  This topic has been retained but taken to Term Three. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to demonstrate basic knowledge and simple skills for managing changes in the environment. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Describes how changes 
take place in the 
environment. 
 
’éĘ Names agents of change. 
’éĘ Recites poems. 
’éĘ Role plays. 
’éĘ Reads words and 
sentences about the types 
of changes. 
’éĘ Writes words and 
sentences about the 
environmental changes. 
 
1. Changes in the environment 
 
a) Biological changes 
’éĘ What they are. 
’éĘ Growth in plants and 
animals. 
’éĘ Physical changes in 
plants and animals. 
’éĘ Managing body 
changes 
- Body care 
- Guidance 
 
’éĘ Naming different 
changes in the 
environment. 
’éĘ Classifying changes 
under biological, 
physical and chemicals. 
’éĘ Writing and singing 
songs about. 
environmental changes. 
’éĘ Experimenting on 
physical changes of 
states of water. 


--- PAGE 60 ---
49 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies the different 
changes in the 
environment. 
 
’éĘ Describes the different 
changes in the 
environment. 
’éĘ Describes the different 
effects / consequences 
of various changes in the 
environment. 
  
b) Chemical changes 
’éĘ What they are 
- Rusting 
- Fermentation 
- Respiration 
- Rotting and 
decaying 
 
c) Physical changes 
’éĘ What they are. 
’éĘ Changes in weather. 
’éĘ Changes in the states 
of matter. 
’éĘ Land slides 
’éĘ Earth quakes 
’éĘ Placement faulting / 
volcanic actions. 
 
2. Characteristics of various 
types of changes in the 
environment. 
 
3. Consequences of various 
types of changes to: people, 
animals and plants 
’éĘ Increases in size. 
’éĘ Increases in temperature. 
’éĘ Mountain formation. 
’éĘ Rain formation. 
’éĘ Change of state. 
 


--- PAGE 61 ---
50 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
  ’éĘ New things are formed. 
’éĘ Placement of things. 
 
 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Creative thinking. 
’éĘ Effective communication. 
’éĘ Problem-solving. 
’éĘ Self-esteem. 
’éĘ Empathy. 
’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Sharing 
’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Concern 
’éĘ Logic 
’éĘ Confident 
’éĘ Acceptance 
1. Name different changes that happen to living things. 
2. List changes in the environment under 
a) Biological 
b) Physical 
c) Chemical 
3. Describe ways of managing different changes that 
happen in our environment. 
 
 
THEME 5: SCIENCE IN HUMAN ACTIVITIES AND OCCUPATIONS 
Topic 2: Keeping Goats, Sheep and Pigs 
General background 
Learners have already learnt about the keeping of rabbits in P4. In this topic, the teacher should build on that scientific knowledge to 
guide learners to keep other bigger animals like goats, sheep and pigs. 
It is important to arrange field visits to nearby animal farms to emphasize the importance and skills of keeping goats, sheep and pigs. 
This topic existed in term one but has been taken to Term Three. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to demonstrate scientific knowledge and skills necessary for keeping bigger animals as well as start and manage 
animal keeping projects. 


--- PAGE 62 ---
51 
 
 
 
 
 
SUBJECT COMPETENCES LANGUAGE 
COMPETENCES 
CONTENT SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies names of 
external parts of goats, 
pigs and sheep. 
 
 
’éĘ Describes different 
breeds of goats and 
sheep. 
’éĘ Describes uses of goats 
and sheep. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Discusses the causes, 
signs, symptoms, 
prevention and control 
measures of diseases of 
goats and sheep. 
 
’éĘ Discusses the causes, 
signs, symptoms, 
prevention and control 
measures of parasites 
and diseases of pigs. 
 
’éĘ Names the external parts 
of goats, sheep and pigs. 
’éĘ Recites a rhyme about 
products of goats, sheep 
and pigs. 
’éĘ Reads words, sentences, 
stories on goats, sheep 
and pigs. 
’éĘ Writes words, sentences 
and stories of goats, 
sheep and pigs. 
’éĘ Draws and labels external 
parts of goats, sheep and 
pigs. 
 
1. Keeping goats and sheep 
’éĘ External parts of goats 
and sheep 
o Uses 
o Breeds 
2. Housing and management of 
goats and sheep. 
 
3. Products from goats and 
sheep e.g. 
’éĘ Meat  
’éĘ Skins 
’éĘ Wool 
’éĘ Milk  
 
4. Diseases of goats and sheep 
’éĘ Causes 
’éĘ Signs and symptoms 
’éĘ Prevention and control. 
 
5. Keeping pigs 
’éĘ External parts of a pig. 
’éĘ Breeds of pigs. 
’éĘ Proper housing and 
management of pigs. 
’éĘ Common parasites and 
diseases of pigs. 
’éĘ Causes, signs and 
 
’éĘ Listing external parts of 
goats, sheep and pigs. 
’éĘ Naming different breeds 
of goats sheep and 
pigs. 
’éĘ Listing products of 
goats, pigs and sheep. 
’éĘ Discussing how to 
control parasites and 
diseases of goats, 
sheep and pigs. 
’éĘ Drawing and labeling 
the external parts of 
goats, sheep and pigs. 
’éĘ Caring for goats, sheep 
and pigs (a project). 
’éĘ Draws and labels 
external parts of goats 
and sheep. 
’éĘ Lists products from 
goats and sheep. 
’éĘ Identifies breeds of pigs. 
’éĘ Describes ways of 
housing and managing 
pigs. 
’éĘ names common 
parasites and diseases 
of pigs 


--- PAGE 63 ---
52 
 
 
 
SUBJECT COMPETENCES LANGUAGE 
COMPETENCES 
CONTENT SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Designs a work plan for 
and starts an animal 
keeping project. 
 symptoms, prevention, 
control and treatment of 
pig diseases and worm 
infestations. 
 
6. Starting pigs, goats and 
sheep project and record 
keeping of activities carried 
out. 
’éĘ 
 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Effective communication. ’éĘ Responsibility 1. Name the different breeds of goats, sheep and pigs. 
2. Identify the diseases and parasites of goats, sheep and 
pigs. 
3. Draw and label the external parts of goats, sheep and 
pigs. 
’éĘ Decision-making. ’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Critical thinking. ’éĘ Logic 
 ’éĘ Concern 
 
THEME 5:       HUMAN HEALTH 
Topic 3: Food and Nutrition 
General Background 
Food and Nutrition is a primary aspect of life for both plants and animals. Food is important for growth and dev elopment of living 
things. In P4 the learners learnt the need for food and classified available foodstuffs under classes of carbohydrates, prote ins, 
vitamins and minerals. Learners will now learn the advantages and disadvantages of breast feeding, bottle f eeding, traditional  
customs and food taboos. 


--- PAGE 64 ---
53 
 
 
 
You should guide the learners to tell the importance of feeding the vulnerable groups of people well. Lead learners to discus s 
appropriate and prevailing views on the right use of the staple foods in the commu nity. This will enable them increase their knowledge 
on proper food and nutrition and acquire skills for feeding people with different needs in the community. This topic existed in Term 
Two but has been taken to Term Three. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to use scientific knowledge and skills necessary for keeping bigger animals and become able to start and manage 
animal keeping projects. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains what breast 
feeding is, its 
advantages and 
disadvantages. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Explains what bottle 
feeding is, its 
advantages and 
disadvantages. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies the vulnerable 
groups of people. 
 
’éĘ Names food for different 
communities. 
’éĘ Recites poems and sings 
songs on breastfeeding. 
’éĘ Writing food diets for the 
vulnerable people. 
’éĘ Explains some dishes for 
the vulnerable. 
 
1. Breast feeding 
’éĘ What it is 
’éĘ Advantages and 
disadvantages to: 
- mother 
- baby 
- family 
 
2. Bottle feeding 
’éĘ What it is. 
’éĘ Advantages and 
disadvantages to: 
- mother 
- baby 
- family 
 
3. The vulnerable groups 
’éĘ Who they are? 
- weaning babies 
- the sick 
- the elderly 
- convalescents 
 
’éĘ Writing advantages 
and disadvantages of 
breast feeding to: 
’éĘ Mother 
’éĘ Baby 
’éĘ Care family 
’éĘ Explaining the 
instances when bottle 
feeding is necessary. 
’éĘ Listing different 
vulnerable groups of 
people. 
’éĘ Explaining why 
vulnerable people 
need special feeding? 
’éĘ Discussing the 
customs and food 
taboos in your society? 
’éĘ Writing advantages 
and disadvantages of 
food taboos. 


--- PAGE 65 ---
54 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Explains traditional 
customs and their 
advantages and 
disadvantages to the 
community. 
’éĘ Identifies different food 
patterns for different 
communities. 
 - breast feeding 
- pregnant mothers and 
their unborn children. 
’éĘ Food for the vulnerable 
- soft drinks 
- soft foods 
- balanced diet 
’éĘ Traditional customs and 
food taboos in 
communities. 
- what taboos are e.g. 
women should not eat 
chicken, eggs, etc. 
- effects of food taboos in 
nutrition. 
 
4. Food consumption patterns in 
the community. 
’éĘ Staple foods of different 
communities. 
’éĘ Other foods of different 
communities. 
’éĘ Identifying different 
food consumption 
patterns in a 
community. 
’éĘ Describing food for the 
vulnerable. 
 
’éĘ Differentiates bottle 
feeding. 
 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Effective communication. 
’éĘ Self-awareness. 
’éĘ Creative thinking. 
’éĘ Self-esteem. 
’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Love 
’éĘ Appreciation 
1. Write advantages and disadvantages of: 
a) Breast feeding 
b) Bottle feeding 
c) Food taboos. 
2. List five groups of vulnerable people in the community. 


--- PAGE 66 ---
55 
 
 
 
’éĘ Problem-solving. 
’éĘ Critical thinking. 
’éĘ Respect 
’éĘ Patience 
’éĘ Fluency 
3.  Describe different staple foods for different communities. 
 
 
THEME:   HUMAN HEALTH 
Topic 4:      Primary Health Care (PHC) 
General Background 
In this topic, learners should be involved in activities which enable them to carry out health activities t hat use the knowledge they have 
so far gained in health education theories. Community hygiene activities at this level should mainly be confined to school ke eping the 
compound clean disposing rubbish, latrine, hygiene, etc to be an example to the community . This topic was merged from P5 Term 
Three, P6 Term two and P7 Term one. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to apply knowledge of the elements and principles of Primary Health Care for improved quality of life. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Describes what PHC is, 
its elements and 
principles. 
 
 
’éĘ Demonstrates activities 
of PHC in promotion of 
community hygiene. 
 
 
’éĘ Explains the 
 
’éĘ Describes what PHC is, its 
elements and principles. 
’éĘ Listens to stories about 
PHC activities in the 
community. 
’éĘ Sings songs about PHC 
promotion in the 
community. 
’éĘ Reads words, sentences 
and stories about PHC 
activities in the 
community. 
 
1. Primary Health Care 
’éĘ What it is. 
’éĘ Elements and Principles of 
PHC. 
 
2. Activities in PHC in promotion 
of community hygiene e.g. 
’éĘ Rubbish and excreta 
disposal. 
’éĘ Protecting water sources. 
 
3. Responsibility of individuals, 
 
’éĘ Describing PHC, its 
elements and 
principles. 
’éĘ Practicing activities of 
PHC in the community. 
’éĘ Demonstrating the 
responsibilities of 
individuals, families and 
community in health 
promotion. 
’éĘ Naming people with 
special needs in the 


--- PAGE 67 ---
56 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
responsibilities of 
individuals, families and 
the community in health 
promotion. 
 
’éĘ Identifies the different 
types of people with 
special needs in the 
community and how to 
care for them. 
’éĘ Writes words, sentences 
and stories about PHC 
activities in the 
community. 
family and community in 
health promotion. 
 
 
4. Suitable lifestyles and good 
health practices. 
 
5. People with special needs in 
the community e.g. 
’éĘ the sick 
’éĘ the elderly 
’éĘ the disabled 
’éĘ the young 
 
6. Care for people with special 
needs e.g. 
- protection 
- medication 
community. 
’éĘ Discussing how to care 
for people with special 
needs. 
 
Life Skills Values Assessment Activities 
’éĘ Self-awareness. ’éĘ Sympathy 1. List the activities of PHC in promotion of community 
hygiene. 
2. Describe the responsibilities of individuals, family and the 
community in health promotion. 
3. Discuss how to care for people with special needs in the 
community. 
’éĘ Self-esteem. ’éĘ Confidence 
’éĘ Empathy. ’éĘ Responsibility 
’éĘ Problem-solving. ’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Decision making. ’éĘ Logic 
’éĘ Critical thinking. ’éĘ Concern 
 ’éĘ Acceptance 
 ’éĘ Love 
 ’éĘ Sharing 
 ’éĘ Appreciation 


--- PAGE 68 ---
57 
 
 
 
 
Word List 
 
Poultry Keeping 
’éĘ poultry 
’éĘ external 
’éĘ functions 
’éĘ systems 
 
’éĘ beak 
’éĘ claws 
’éĘ wattle 
’éĘ scales 
’éĘ broilers 
’éĘ layers 
 
’éĘ free range 
’éĘ deep litter 
’éĘ fold pen 
’éĘ fowl 
 
Bee Keeping 
’éĘ swarming 
’éĘ drones 
’éĘ pollination 
’éĘ wax 
’éĘ propolis 
 
’éĘ leakage 
’éĘ dug out log 
’éĘ top bar hive 
’éĘ excessive heat 
 
Measurement 
’éĘ mass 
’éĘ weight 
’éĘ volume 
’éĘ capacity 
 
’éĘ floating 
’éĘ sinking 
’éĘ displacement 
’éĘ density (ies) 
 
’éĘ instruments 
 
 
Immunization 
’éĘ immunity 
’éĘ vaccine(s) 
’éĘ immunisable 
’éĘ symptoms 
’éĘ diphtheria 
’éĘ meningitis 
 
’éĘ hemophilia influenza 
’éĘ Hepatitis B 
’éĘ whooping cough 
’éĘ Tuberculosis 
’éĘ Tetanus 
’éĘ Yellow fever 


--- PAGE 69 ---
58 
 
 
 
 
Digestive System 
’éĘ digestion 
’éĘ aesophagus 
’éĘ rectum 
’éĘ salivary glands 
’éĘ pancreas 
’éĘ disorder(s) 
’éĘ efficiency 
 
’éĘ ulcers 
’éĘ intestinal obstruction 
’éĘ constipation 
’éĘ vomiting 
’éĘ digestive system 
’éĘ habit 
’éĘ maintain(ing) 
 
Components of the Environment: Soil 
’éĘ fertilizers 
’éĘ artificial 
’éĘ mulches 
’éĘ properties 
’éĘ harmful 
’éĘ components 
’éĘ erosion 
’éĘ agent(s) 
’éĘ conservation 
’éĘ compost 
’éĘ loam 
’éĘ clay 
’éĘ bacteria 
’éĘ fungi 
’éĘ chemicals 
’éĘ fertility 
’éĘ manure 
’éĘ humus 
’éĘ green manure 
’éĘ organic manure 
’éĘ habitat 
’éĘ mining 
’éĘ polythene 
’éĘ fertilizers 
’éĘ mineral 
 
 
Heat Energy 
’éĘ solutes 
’éĘ solvents 
’éĘ characteristics 
’éĘ transfer 
’éĘ expansion 
’éĘ evaporation 
’éĘ sublimation 
’éĘ conduction 
’éĘ Fahrenheit scale 
’éĘ conversion 
 
’éĘ dissolving 
’éĘ mixtures 
’éĘ forms 
’éĘ kinetic energy 
’éĘ gases 
’éĘ contraction 
’éĘ freezing 
’éĘ radiation 
’éĘ convection 
’éĘ clinical thermometer 
 
’éĘ potential energy 
’éĘ exerts 
’éĘ pressure 
’éĘ solid 
’éĘ magnetism 
’éĘ melting 
’éĘ condensation 
’éĘ vacuum 
’éĘ Celsius scale 
’éĘ’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 70 ---
59 
 
 
’ĆĀ
Occupations in our Community: Crop Growing 
’éĘ tuber crops 
’éĘ tubers 
’éĘ pests 
’éĘ cassava mosaic 
’éĘ rotting 
’éĘ spraying 
’éĘ crop rotation 
’éĘ rogging 
’éĘ storage 
’éĘ potato blight 
 
Bacteria and Fungi 
’éĘ organisms 
’éĘ agent(s) 
’éĘ bacterial diseases 
 
’éĘ harmless 
’éĘ fungal diseases 
 
Types of Changes ŌĆō Biological, Physical and Chemical Changes 
’éĘ biological 
’éĘ chemical 
’éĘ adolescents 
’éĘ melting 
’éĘ rusting 
’éĘ fermentation 
’éĘ respiration 
’éĘ decaying 
’éĘ freezing 
’éĘ placement faults 
 
Keeping Goats, Sheep and Pigs 
’éĘ parasite(s) ’éĘ swine flue ’éĘ flock 
 
Food and Nutrition 
’éĘ proteins 
’éĘ carbohydrates 
’éĘ vitamins 
’éĘ staple food(s) 
 
’éĘ minerals 
’éĘ vulnerable 
’éĘ weaning 
’éĘ consumption 
 
’éĘ convalescents 
’éĘ nutrition 
’éĘ balanced diet 
 
Primary Health Care (PHC) 
’éĘ elements 
’éĘ principles 
’éĘ hygiene 
’éĘ excreta 
’éĘ disposal 
’éĘ suitable 
’éĘ practices 


--- PAGE 71 ---
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Language 


--- PAGE 72 ---
61 
 
 
Background     
This is a primary Five Local Language Syllabus. Local Language means the language of the locality where the school is situate d. In 
some cases such as  army schools which are bound to use Kiswahili,  it may be a language decided on for convenience. Local 
Language teaching at Primary Five will focus on language in use plus some grammar. Culture and life skills will also be taught. 
 
Rationale 
One of the National Aims of Education as stipulated in the Government White Paper is to ŌĆ£promote understanding and appreciation of 
the value of national unity, patriotism and cultural heritage, with due consideration to internal relations and beneficial 
interdependenceŌĆØ. Patriotism for oneŌĆÖs country can only be achieved if learners are taught to respect and love their heritage, 
languages, communities, districts and eventually pride in being a Ugandan. Learning the grammar of a familiar language will give the 
learner a background to learning other languages in future. 
 
General Aims of Teaching a Local language 
When the learners go through this Syllabus, they will be able to: 
1. Demonstrate permanent functional literacy. 
2. Communicate effectively in Local Language. 
3. Listen attentively and respond accurately and appropriately to instructions / directions. 
4. Use correct language pattern / system in writing. 
5. Explain the significance of cultural practices and rituals. 
6. Create original stories around given situations. 
7. Read a given text fluently with high level of comprehension. 
8. Write stories, texts, reports or letters with correct use of orthography, structures and punctuation. 
9. Develop a sense of pride for his/her language and culture and respect for other peopleŌĆÖs culture. 
 
General Methodology 
It is strongly advisable that learners are taught using participatory methods. Local Language like any other language should be 
taught to the learners focusing on the four basic language skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
In every topic the aspects of culture related to that topic should be taught for example proverbs or taboos. 
 
Methodology for Specific language aspects 
a) Orthography: 


--- PAGE 73 ---
62 
 
 
 
Though this was handled in Primary Three and Four, there is need to continue reminding learners of the rules of 
orthography whenever grammar is being taught. 
 
b) Comprehension: 
Learners should be availed with a number of reading texts. These will not only be used for comprehension but also for teaching 
punctuation, tenses, prepositions, and other aspects of grammar. 
 
c) Oral Literature forms: 
These are: proverbs, similes, metaphors and idioms. These should be taught in relation to the topic at hand, for example, a topic on 
environment can be used to teach proverbs or taboos related to environment. 
 
d) Culture: 
Language and culture are inseparable. The morals, values, responsibilities are taught through culture. Aspects of culture should 
be taught as various topics, for example, if you teach about meetings you can teach about sayings referring to meetings. 
 
e) Penmanship: 
Language teaching aims at making learners functionally literate.  They learn to communicate effectively both orally and in 
writing. Whenever there is a writing activity, the learner should be helped and reminded to write legibly. 
 
f) Punctuation: 
This is an important aspect of writing but should be taught using texts where the punctuation marks have been used. 
 
6.0 Hints to the Teacher 
The teacher needs to develop certain interests and engage in certain activities in order to manage the teaching and learning process 
properly, for example, by:  
 
a) Collecting materials and information about culture of that community (where the school is) such as names of people, places, 
objects, landmarks, their origin and meaning. 
Practices of the people, child rearing, dressing habits, religious beliefs, cures for common illnesses, beliefs about certain diseases, 
occupations and implements social behaviour e.g. greetings and values, historical data on the villages in the neighbourhood. 
b) Visiting places of cultural interest in that area and find out what those people cherish. 
c) Assessing your culture objectively and find ways to add to or improve on that culture. 
d) Treating other peopleŌĆÖs cultures with understanding and teach learners to do the same. 


--- PAGE 74 ---
63 
 
 
 
NB: 
For the topics which are not language related like Human Rights, Child Labour, HIV and AIDS and so on.  You are expected to 
concentrate more on the grammar, vocabulary and the structures used. The learners, however, will learn the content of the text 
through comprehension. 
 
7.0 Materials to be used 
These include charts, books, news captions, concrete materials, art facts books. These could be prepared by the teacher, photocopied, 
bought or borrowed. 
 
8.0 Assessment: 
Assessment is a very important part of the learning process, as it indicates where the strength and weaknesses in the learning and 
teaching process are. 
 
You are expected to determine the learnersŌĆÖ achievement through: 
a) Observation (of behaviour and life skills). 
b) Continuous assessment (of topic, unit or week) 
c) Examinations (for instance at the end of the term or year) 
 
Besides continuous assessment and end of term, there should be end of year examinations but must have a bearing on the 
records kept every term. 
 
9.0 Topic Outline 
Term I 
TOPIC SUB-TOPIC PERIODS 
1. Language used in different public 
places 
’éĘ Names of public places  
 
14 
’éĘ Language used 
’éĘ Directions 
’éĘ Behaviour 
’éĘ Workers and tools used 
2.  Meetings ’éĘ Cultural meetings 10 
’éĘ Political meetings 


--- PAGE 75 ---
64 
 
 
 
3.  Human Rights and Responsibilities ’éĘ A text on Human Rights  
12 ’éĘ ChildrenŌĆÖs Rights 
’éĘ ChildrenŌĆÖs Responsibilities 
’éĘ Compound sentences 
 
Term II 
TOPIC SUB-TOPIC PERIODS 
1.  Making use of reading materials ’éĘ Types of reading materials  
12 ’éĘ Content in reading materials 
’éĘ Purposes for reading 
2.  Modern communication ’éĘ Types of items 
’éĘ How the items are used 
 
10 
3.  Advanced Creative language ’éĘ Text on environmental conservation  
 
14 
’éĘ Compound sentences 
’éĘ Paragraphing 
’éĘ Oral Literature 
Term III 
TOPIC SUB-TOPIC PERIODS 
1.  Child Labour ’éĘ A Text on Child Labour  
8 ’éĘ Present simple Tense 
’éĘ Future Tense 
2.  HIV/AIDS ’éĘ A Text on HIV/AIDS  
6 ’éĘ Guided Compositions 
’éĘ Oral Literature 
3.  Letter Writing ’éĘ Informal Letters  
 
12 
’éĘ Tenses 
’éĘ Text on Peace Education 
’éĘ Composition 
’éĘ Oral Literature 


--- PAGE 76 ---
65 
 
 
 
TERM 1 
TOPIC 1: LANGUAGE USED IN DIFFERENT PUBLIC PLACES 
RATIONALE 
The learner at this stage is beginning to be exposed to several public places, such as churches, schools and markets among others. It 
is therefore important for the learner to learn the appropriate language and behaviour expected of him/her while in those places. 
 
BACKGROUND TO THE TOPIC 
At this level, there is a lot of communication among learners both at school and at the community level where they stay. They 
therefore need to be conversant with different salutatio ns and the appropriate language  used in public places.  It is important that you 
gather as much vocabulary as possible to cover the titles of different people, their roles and the appropriate language for e ffective 
communication. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOME 
The learner is able to communicate effectively in different public places to deliver accurate messages appropriately and effectively. 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Effective communication 
Make sure the learnersŌĆÖ responses are well structured in correct full sentences. 
 
’éĘ Interpersonal relationships 
Supervise the learners when working in groups. 
 
Subject Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies public places and the 
activities that go on in those 
places. 
 
’éĘ Creates stories about different 
places. 
 
’éĘ Names of public places. 
 
 
’éĘ Stories 
 
’éĘ Identifying the different public places. 
’éĘ Describing public places mentioned. 
’éĘ Writing descriptive stories about the named places. 
’éĘ Completing/copying proverbs related to the public places. 
’éĘ Reading stories about named places. 
’éĘ Answering questions on stories read. 


--- PAGE 77 ---
66 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Content Suggested Activities 
’éĘ Uses polite phrases and 
vocabulary appropriately. 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Demonstrates how to ask for 
direction to reach a 
destination. 
’éĘ Polite language used in 
public places e.g. 
- Thank you. 
- Excuse me. 
- I am sorry. 
- May I help you 
please ŌĆ”? 
 
’éĘ Directions 
- asking for direction. 
- giving direction. 
’éĘ Conversing about common events using appropriate language. 
’éĘ Borrowing items using appropriate phrases. 
’éĘ Role playing behaviours e.g. apologizing. 
’éĘ Using appropriate language in public. 
’éĘ Greeting other people appropriately. 
’éĘ Giving directions and instructions. 
’éĘ Reading a dialogue about showing the way. 
’éĘ Writing a dialogue reflecting polite language. 
’éĘ Demonstrates how to behave in 
public places. 
’éĘ Behaviour in public 
- desirable. 
- non-desirable. 
’éĘ Apologizing to others when in error using correct phrases 
’éĘ Observing others role playing for the correct actions. 
’éĘ Asking others for advice. 
’éĘ Choosing the right language to use. 
’éĘ Showing concern for children, the elderly and the disabled. 
’éĘ Reading/ acting a dialogue between workers and visitors. 
’éĘ Role playing behaviours and work in public places. 
’éĘ Participating or watching a role play on how to behave in 
public places. 
’éĘ Identifies workers in a given 
place by title and roles. 
’éĘ Describes things used. 
 
’éĘ Constructs correct sentences 
about places, workers, tools or 
their roles. 
’éĘ Workers in a given 
place. 
- titles 
- duties 
’éĘ Tools used by the 
workers. 
’éĘ Talking about workers by title. 
’éĘ Talking about the roles of the workers. 
’éĘ Drawing and labeling the tools and objects used. 
’éĘ Making sentences referring to workers and their roles. 
 


--- PAGE 78 ---
67 
 
 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
’éĘ Through question and answer, ask learners to name public places they know in their community like: market or worship buildings. 
’éĘ Divide the class into small groups and ask them to list activities that take place in those public places. This gives learners a 
chance to make friends and learn how to work with others. 
’éĘ Make a table on the chalkboard with headings in two columns: Places and Activities and ask learners to match them. 
’éĘ Discuss with the learners different situations in which polite language is required. Give learners a chance to share their experience, 
about what they know. 
’éĘ Organize short activities of role-play depicting how people interact in those public places. Give learners a chance to volunteer for 
the role play.  This will develop a skill of self-awareness. 
’éĘ Let learners with Special Education Needs (SEN) be actively involved in all class activities. Encourage their peers to assist them. 
 
TOPIC 2: MEETINGS 
RATIONALE 
Meetings can be cultural, political or official. This topic will focus on cultural and political meetings. The learner will be exposed to 
special vocabulary and structures used in such meetings. This will prepare them to participate in such meetings effectively in future. 
 
BACKGROUND 
This topic will c over knowledge, vocabulary and procedure of conducting cultural and political meetings.  You are therefore expected 
to make enough research about the two types of meetings. Make research on cultural meetings and campaign speeches in order to 
have the required content to teach. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
The learner is able to acquire vocabulary, knowledge, skills and procedures of conducting cultural and political meetings and 
demonstrate how a campaign speech is delivered. 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Self-awareness 
The learner will be asked to talk about rituals in his/her respective culture. 


--- PAGE 79 ---
68 
 
 
 
’éĘ Effective communication 
The learner will be encouraged to speak up fluently when giving contributions. 
 
’éĘ Critical thinking 
The learner will evaluate rituals in groups. 
 
Subject Competences Content Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies different types of cultural 
meetings / rituals, and the way they 
are conducted. 
 
 
’éĘ’ĆĀ’ĆĀ’ĆĀ’ĆĀ 
 
’éĘ Cultural meetings 
- Type 
- Participants/roles 
- Process 
 
 
- 
 
’éĘ Discussing different types of cultural / ritual meeting 
ceremonies/rituals. 
’éĘ Describing how and where meetings or ceremonies are 
performed. 
’éĘ Identifying participants for meetings and their roles. 
’éĘ Brainstorming on how and where particular 
meetings/ceremonies are performed. 
’éĘ Describes different cultural objects 
used during meetings / ceremonies 
/ rituals. 
’éĘ Explains the significance of certain 
objects and symbols used in 
cultural meetings. 
’éĘ Cultural objects and symbols. 
 
’éĘ Importance of objects and 
symbols used. 
’éĘ Drawing different cultural objects used during meetings 
/ ceremonies / rituals. 
’éĘ Talking about cultural symbols. 
’éĘ Drawing objects used in cultural meeting and labelling 
them. 
’éĘ Explains the purpose of carrying 
out the ceremony and rituals. 
 
 
’éĘ Narrates the beliefs related to the 
procedure of the ritual. 
’éĘ Significance of different 
ceremonies and rituals e.g. 
- initiation 
- baby naming, 
engagement in marriage. 
’éĘ Procedures of cultural beliefs 
related to rituals. 
’éĘ Identifying different ceremonies and rituals. 
’éĘ Describing ceremonies and rituals. 
’éĘ Explaining the purpose of given ceremonies and 
rituals. 
’éĘ Analyzing any beliefs related to the ritual. 
’éĘ Discussing procedures of certain rituals. 
’éĘ Explains some of the beliefs and 
practices related to ceremonies 
’éĘ Beliefs and practices of 
cultural rituals as expressed 
’éĘ Completing proverbs. 
’éĘ Making sentences using idioms. 


--- PAGE 80 ---
69 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Content Activities 
and rituals. in 
- proverbs / sayings 
- taboos 
- idioms 
- similies 
- stories 
’éĘ Writing sentences containing idioms. 
’éĘ Explaining taboos related to ceremonies. 
’éĘ Making sentences that contain similes. 
’éĘ Completing proverbs related to ceremonies in 
sentences. 
’éĘ Using idioms related to ceremonies in sentences. 
’éĘ Making sentences using similies. 
’éĘ Discussing different beliefs and practices. 
’éĘ Explains the importance of a 
village meeting. 
’éĘ Names participants in a village 
meeting. 
’éĘ Describes procedures of a village 
meeting. 
’éĘ Demonstrates how to carry out 
political meetings / rallies. 
’éĘ Village meeting. 
’éĘ Meeting procedures. 
’éĘ    
- Local council 
- Rallies 
’éĘ Writing an agenda for a village meeting. 
’éĘ Writing a speech to mobilize for an activity. 
’éĘ Naming participants in a village meeting. 
’éĘ Describing procedures of a village meeting. 
’éĘ Discussing participants in cultural meetings and their 
roles. 
’éĘ Making a mock political rally. 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
’éĘ Ask learners to name different cultural rituals / ceremonies and their venues. List them on the chalkboard as they are generated. 
This helps the learners to be proud of what they are hence b oosting t heir  self-esteem. 
’éĘ Divide the class into small groups and let each draw a table showing different, participants in such meeting and their roles. 
’éĘ After group presentations, lead a general discussion to ensure consistence across the groups. 
’éĘ Ask learners individually to name and describe objects used and what they are used for. 
’éĘ In small groups, let learners discuss how common rituals affect the candidates who undergo the activities performed. 
Help learners to critically evaluate the ritual hence develop critical thinking. 
’éĘ Allow groups to report to the rest of the class. Allow comments from other groups. 
’éĘ Ask groups to plan and role play the easiest ceremonies / rituals which can be performed by pupils in class. 
’éĘ Start a proverb about rituals and ask learners to complete it, and then allow them to produce similar proverbs. 
’éĘ Give a taboo related to a ceremony or a ritual and ask learners to give more taboos. Discuss each of the taboos briefly. 
’éĘ Ask learners to describe political meetings they have ever attended. 


--- PAGE 81 ---
70 
 
 
 
’éĘ Give chance to shy and slow learners and those with different problems like speech to also participate fully in all class work. (Give 
them extra- time or any required help). 
’éĘ Group learners and ask each group to produce an agenda for a meeting. 
’éĘ Let each group present to the class as you comment on their presentations. 
’éĘ Lead learners to describe the procedures. 
 
TOPIC 3: HUMAN RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
RATIONALE 
The Human Rights Charter was written in English and translated into other international languages.  What learners have met are a  
few interpretations of that charter. They need to have a more informed discussion of those rights that concern them and those  that 
concern their parents. This will help them to respect the rights of their parents as they negotiate for observance of their own. 
 
BACKGROUND 
Get a list of human rights, analyze them and compare them with childrenŌĆÖs rights. Find out from the community which childrenŌĆÖs rights 
are violated most. Research about the responsibilities of learners to self, parents, and communities. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOME 
Learners will construct sentences using conjunctions and plurals of nouns about human rights. 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Self-awareness 
The learners will be taught oneŌĆÖs position and responsibility. 
 
’éĘ Problem-solving 
Learners will evaluate facts about human rights. 
 
’éĘ Effective communication 
Learners will talk freely about instances when their rights had been violated. 
 
’éĘ Critical thinking 
Learners will respond to questions appropriately. 


--- PAGE 82 ---
71 
 
 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads a text on Human Rights 
’éĘ Identifies the importance of human 
rights. 
’éĘ Explains instances which violate Human 
rights. 
’éĘ Describes childrenŌĆÖs responsibilities. 
 
’éĘ A text on Human rights e.g. 
- Identity 
- Nationality 
- Life/live 
’éĘ Violation of rights 
’éĘ ChildrenŌĆÖs rights e.g. 
- education 
- shelter 
- security 
’éĘ ChildrenŌĆÖs responsibilities. 
’éĘ Compound sentence. 
’éĘ Conjunctions. 
 
’éĘ Identifying a number of human rights. 
’éĘ Discussing human rights. 
’éĘ Discussing childrenŌĆÖs rights. 
’éĘ Describing instances of violations of human 
rights. 
’éĘ Giving examples of learnersŌĆÖ rights. 
’éĘ Explaining childrenŌĆÖs responsibilities: 
- to parents 
- to teachers 
- to community 
’éĘ Constructing compound sentences using 
conjunctions. 
’éĘ Generating conjunctions. 
 
’éĘ Listing examples of countable nouns. 
’éĘ Listing examples of uncountable nouns. 
’éĘ Giving plurals of countable nouns. 
’éĘ Changing sentences from singular to plural. 
’éĘ Using countable and uncountable nouns in 
sentences. 
’éĘ Nouns 
- countable 
- uncountable 
- plurals of countable nouns 


--- PAGE 83 ---
72 
 
 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
’éĘ In small groups, let learners list the childrenŌĆÖs rights they have heard about. 
’éĘ Ask the groups to read what they have written as you make a general list of their rights on the chalkboard. (See appendix at the 
end of this syllabus). 
’éĘ Help them to fill the gaps of what they have not spelt out properly and what is totally missing by comparing with the list you 
prepared. 
’éĘ Explain to the learners what violation of rights is. 
’éĘ In a general discussion of question and answer, ask them to describe instances where they think their rights were violated. 
’éĘ Go through the preceding steps again to discuss general human rights. 
’éĘ Compare and discuss the relationship between human rights and childrenŌĆÖs rights. 
’éĘ Make two short related statements and ask learners to combine them into one. 
’éĘ Ask them what words were used to join the sentences. 
’éĘ Explain the role of conjunctions and ask them to construct similar sentences. 
’éĘ Revise the meaning of nouns and ask for plurals. 
’éĘ Help learners to notice how some nouns keep the same form when in plural as that of singular. 
’éĘ Use examples to introduce the idea of countable and uncountable nouns. 
’éĘ Identify the gifted learners in your class and let them take charge in assisting their peers in groups. 
’éĘ Give extra time to the slow learners who will not grasp the new concepts in the expected time. 
’éĘ Take time to identify other learners with particular exceptional behaviours like giving complaints and those who do not see or hear 
properly and allow them to sit in front. 
’éĘ Do not punish those who always sleep in class, but talk to them.  Find out their problems and counsel or guide them. 


--- PAGE 84 ---
73 
 
 
 
TERM II 
TOPIC 1: MAKING USE OF READING MATERIALS 
RATIONALE 
Globally, information is mostly accessed through reading and researching on different topics / reading materials. In order to  have the 
learners cope with this global experience, they should be guided in getting acquainted with various reading materials and how to use 
them. 
 
BACKGROUND 
By now, the learner is able to read but needs skills in categorizing the reading materials such as for interest. Learners are to be helped 
to acquire knowledge on the types of books like, novels, dictionaries and text books . They will also discuss the styles of reading 
according to oneŌĆÖs intention of reading. You are therefore expected to provide the learners with a g ood variety of reading materials 
and to explain fully the materials, the content and how they are used depending on their intention. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOME 
The learner is able to identify different reading materials according to content and demonstrate the right style of reading with 
comprehension. 
 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Critical thinking 
Learners will be helped to make the best use of the information availed. 
 
’éĘ Effective communication 
Learners will ask and answer questions. 
 
’éĘ Problem-solving 
Learners will identify different reading materials. 
 
’éĘ Creative thinking 
Learners will choose from the different styles of reading 


--- PAGE 85 ---
74 
 
 
 
Competences Content Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Differentiates the types of 
reading materials and their 
importance and style of 
reading. 
’éĘ Explains the purpose for each 
style. 
 
’éĘ Types of reading materials e.g. 
- News papers 
- Novels 
- Religious books and 
- Text books. 
’éĘ Purpose of different reading 
materials. 
’éĘ Style of reading. 
 
’éĘ Identifying different types of reading materials 
according to content. 
’éĘ Explaining different purpose of reading. 
’éĘ Listening, asking and answering questions about the 
definition of skimming, scanning and reading for 
comprehension. 
’éĘ Scanning a text and answering comprehension 
questions. 
’éĘ Skimming a newspaper and answering questions. 
’éĘ Reading a text and answering comprehension 
questions. 
’éĘ Discussing the purpose for each style. 
’éĘ Answering questions on a text read. 
’éĘ Describes the content 
presented in different reading 
materials 
’éĘ Content in different reading 
materials e.g. novel, stories, 
dictionaries- meaning of the 
words, text book content and 
exercises. 
’éĘ Studying materials by the help of the teacher. 
’éĘ In groups, describing the main items in the reading 
materials. 
’éĘ Comparing reading materials according to content. 
’éĘ Explaining using examples of the differences between 
reading materials. 
’éĘ Analyses the purposes for 
reading different types of 
materials. 
’éĘ Purpose for reading e.g. 
for 
Leisure e.g. novels 
Information e.g. Religious 
books 
Comprehension  
’éĘ Purpose for reading e.g. for 
leisure (novels) or information 
(Religious books). 
- Comprehension 
 
’éĘ Poems, rhymes, songs 
’éĘ Identifying what to read. 
’éĘ Explaining uses of reading. 
’éĘ Scanning through a given document and answering 
question on it. 
’éĘ Concentrating on the reading. (for comprehension) 
’éĘ Reading poems or songs. 
’éĘ Answering questions on poems. 
’éĘ Discussing purposes for reading. 
’éĘ Reading a given text for comprehension. 


--- PAGE 86 ---
75 
 
 
 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
 
The guidelines here below may not be the only ones to follow but use your own experience depending on your environment and 
situation to enable the learner achieve the intended life skills and competences. 
’éĘ Lead learners to name the reading materials they know as you list them on the chalkboard. 
’éĘ Discuss the difference between the learning materials in terms of content and use. 
’éĘ Demonstrate different types of reading using different materials as learners watch. 
’éĘ Guide learners to practice different styles of reading. 
’éĘ Give out a text which they can read for comprehension. 
’éĘ Guide the learners to identify the main aspects in a reading material. 
’éĘ Give out different materials and ask learners to identify and describe those main aspects of a reading material. 
’éĘ Lead learners to compare reading materials according to content. 
’éĘ Guide learners to brainstorm about the purpose of reading. 
’éĘ Record and complement the responses. 
’éĘ Ask the learners to write types of various texts about reading materials, purposes of reading and style of reading. 
’éĘ Provide rhymes and poems for learners to read and give them oral questions. 
 
TOPIC 2: MODERN COMMUNICATION 
RATIONALE 
Many learners have used some gadgets for modern communication like radio and telephone, although they may not be in a position to 
classify them. They are used in a similar role of communicating among human beings. In P.4, these learners discussed local me dia. 
Now there is need to teach them about modern means of receiving and sending information. The topic will enable them to match with 
global advanced information communication technology. They will also learn that apart from receiving, they can also search fo r 
information. 
 
BACKGROUND 
The learners already practis e modern communication both at home, in the communities and at school. In P4 they learnt about the 
different types of local media on which they can now build the modern means of communication, thus from known to the u nknown. 
Give learners as much exposure as possible as some of them may not easily comprehend what they have never seen. 


--- PAGE 87 ---
76 
 
 
 
LEARNING OUTCOME 
The learner is able to identify the different types/items of modern communication, explain how they work and demonstrate appropriate 
skills and language when using different gadgets. 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Effective communication 
Reading the text related to communication. 
 
’éĘ Negotiation skills 
Using the appropriate language depending on the media. 
 
’éĘ Decision making 
Making choice on the type of gadget to use.  Asking and answering questions on phone. 
 
Competences Content Activities 
The learner; 
’éĘ Identifies the different types of 
items / gadgets used in modern 
communication. 
’éĘ Explains how different types of 
gadgets are used in 
communication. 
’éĘ Types of items / gadgets used 
in modern communication. 
’éĘ Different ways each type of 
communication gadgets 
works. 
’éĘ Types of messages 
communicated by different 
kinds of communication 
gadgets. 
’éĘ Identifying different communication gadgets. 
’éĘ Observing the available communication gadgets. 
’éĘ Discussing different messages communicated 
by the different types of the communication 
gadgets. 
’éĘ Reading texts related to modern communication. 
’éĘ Writing different compositions on how different 
communication gadgets work. 
’éĘ Identifying types of messages communicated. 
’éĘ Writing a composition on how communication 
gadgets work. 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
’éĘ Bring a radio to class and use it to start your lesson.  
’éĘ Discuss with the class how a radio works, for example, what we get from it and who sends that information on the air waves. 
’éĘ Talk about other gadgets which they are familiar with, start with those they have heard about and inform them about new ones. 


--- PAGE 88 ---
77 
 
 
 
’éĘ As you discuss, show the real objects or pictures of those gadgets. 
’éĘ Remember to ask learners to name what sense we use to receive the communication from each gadget; (the eye/the ear) 
’éĘ Guide composition writing about the use of one type of communication gadget they are familiar with such as radio or phone. 
’éĘ Help learners to construct questions hence demonstrate the use of question marks. 
’éĘ Teach about the comma, demonstrate its use. 
’éĘ Give a written exercise on the use of a question mark and a comma. 
’éĘ Construct compound sentences and teach learners how to insert commas for easy reading. 
 
TOPIC 3: ADVANCED CREATIVE LANGUAGE 
RATIONALE 
Since the learners have been using the language in speech, reading and writing, they have acquired some level of competence.  
Using advanced creative language, learners will be exposed to texts that have information to  be discussed. This will add to the variety 
of vocabulary and structures they already have in use. 
 
BACKGROUND 
This topic will cover reading a text on cultural and modern environmental conservation.  These will initiate comprehension, d ebate,  
use of compound sentences and a comma. For practice and preparation  for advanced creative language, you need to guide learners 
to practice writing paragraphs. You also need to prepare the text on environmental conservation ahead of time, which they wil l read  
for vocationary, structures, punctuation and comprehension. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOME 
The learner is able to demonstrate the ability to read and comprehend a given text and use the most appropriate language to write on 
a given topic using correct grammar. 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Decision-making 
Choosing methods of protecting the environment. 
 
’éĘ Effective communication 
- Writing a composition. 
- Composing a text on objects. 


--- PAGE 89 ---
78 
 
 
 
’éĘ Critical thinking 
- Friendship formation. 
- Working in groups. 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities  
The learner: 
’éĘ Constructs sentences 
related to environmental 
conservation methods. 
’éĘ Differentiates between modern and 
cultural environmental conservation. 
’éĘ Constructs compound sentences 
correctly. 
 
’éĘ Environmental conservation 
methods 
- Cultural 
- Modern 
 
’éĘ Compound sentence and 
uses of a comma 
- breaking a sentence 
- naming things 
- titles e.g. Mrs, Mr. 
- on address 
- before quotation marks. 
 
’éĘ Identifying environmental conservation methods, 
cultural or modern. 
’éĘ Reading a text on conservation. 
’éĘ Reading a text on environmental protection. 
’éĘ Answering questions in writing about the text on 
the modern and cultural environmental 
conservation. 
’éĘ Discussing the similarities and differences 
between modern and cultural methods of 
environmental conservation. 
’éĘ Constructing compound sentences. 
’éĘ Constructing sentences with a comma. 
’éĘ Describing and giving examples on the use of a 
comma. 
’éĘ Explains the principles of 
paragraphing. 
’éĘ Writes a composition (free creative 
text). 
’éĘ Paragraphing. 
’éĘ Composition writing. 
’éĘ Discussing the principles of paragraphing. 
’éĘ Writing the objects to be talked about in a story 
(plot). 
’éĘ Writing a guided composition on a topic. 
’éĘ Choosing a topic to write on. 
’éĘ Writing the plot of the composition. 
’éĘ Reads, recites and acts poems with 
fluency. 
’éĘ Poems related to particular 
objects  
’éĘ Songs related to particular 
events. 
’éĘ Reading poems following rhythm. 
’éĘ Singing songs related to common events. 
’éĘ Answering comprehension questions from 
poems. 
’éĘ Discussing themes that are suitable for writing 


--- PAGE 90 ---
79 
 
 
 
Competences Content Suggested Activities  
  poems. 
’éĘ Writing poems on a selected theme. 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
 
- Guide learners to identify environmental conservation methods they know and group the methods in their respective categories. 
- Note the good points on the blackboard. 
- Give them a text on environmental concern to read for comprehension. Ask oral and written questions. 
- Using examples, guide learners to select an object to write on. 
- Demonstrate / work with them to produce a plot for the chosen topic. 
- Let them practice writing a plot of a given topic in groups. 
- Guide the groups to report as you comment. 
- Present prepared poems to learners either on a chart or photocopies. 
- Demonstrate several times how a poem is read as learners listen. 
- Ask learners to practice reading a poem.  Guide them as they read. 
- Ask them to answer comprehension questions on the poem. 
 
Note: Use text on environmental conservation and a poem on environmental concern. 


--- PAGE 91 ---
80 
 
 
 
TERM III 
TOPIC 1: CHILD LABOUR 
 
RATIONALE 
Child labour is one form of child abuse and one of the things that have affected childrenŌĆÖs educatio n and livelihood in general. This 
topic is intended to give learners awareness about effects and dangers of child labour so that they can make informed decisio ns when 
faced with certain conditions. 
 
BACKGROUND 
In this topic, learners will be exposed to a t ext on child labour which will highlight the definition, forms of child labour, its causes and 
consequences. You need to research on literature about child labour from KURET, International Rescue Committee, Naggulu or th e 
Library so that you teach from an informed point of view. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOME 
The learner is able to demonstrate awareness of the information presented on child labour and use the text to practice grammar 
aspects in use. 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Assertiveness 
Standing for oneŌĆÖs right. 
 
’éĘ Self esteem 
Expressing likes and dislikes. 
 
’éĘ Negotiation skills 
Responding appropriately. 
 
’éĘ Peer resistance 
Standing by oneŌĆÖs principles. 


--- PAGE 92 ---
81 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads a text on child labour. 
’éĘ Discusses the forms of child labour. 
’éĘ Answers questions on text. 
’éĘ Constructs correct sentences in present 
simple tense. 
’éĘ Constructs correct sentences in future tense. 
 
’éĘ Text on child labour focusing 
on: 
- Forms 
- Child work 
- Causes 
- Consequences. 
 
’éĘ Comprehension 
’éĘ Present simple tense. 
’éĘ Future tense. 
 
’éĘ Reading a text on child labour. 
’éĘ Answering questions on child labour text. 
’éĘ Discussing forms of child labour. 
’éĘ Making sentences in present tense. 
’éĘ Reading sentences in present tense. 
’éĘ Making sentences in future tense. 
’éĘ Writing sentences in future and present 
tense. 
’éĘ Acting a dialogue on child labour. 
’éĘ Writing messages against child labour. 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
’éĘ Ask learners to brainstorm on what they understand by child labour. Complement by giving the definition. 
’éĘ Guide a discussion by giving a few examples of forms of child labour to set the pace. 
’éĘ Record the good responses on the chalkboard. 
’éĘ Lead the discussion on the differences between child labour and child work. 
’éĘ Record the differences given, then ask learners to copy them. 
’éĘ Give two sentences in present simple tense and ask learners to give similar ones. 
’éĘ Guide the presentation as you record the good ones. 
’éĘ Tell the learners that those sentences are in present simple tense. 
’éĘ Give two sentences in future tense. 
’éĘ Ask learners to give similar sentences in future tense. 
’éĘ Record the good responses. 
’éĘ Let the learners read the sentences recorded. 
’éĘ Let the learners copy the sentences in present and future tenses as examples and formulate their own in their books. 
’éĘ Give an exercise in which learners change sentences from one tense to another. 
Note: Brief notes on child labour have been provided at the end of this syllabus 


--- PAGE 93 ---
82 
 
 
 
TOPIC 2: HIV / AIDS 
RATIONALE 
HIV/AIDS is one of the most harmful infections commonly talked about in this era. It is a common belief in Uganda that every body 
knows what HIV/AIDS is, itŌĆÖs causes, its effect, and the way it spreads. Unfortunately it is not true because whenever HIV/AIDS is 
talked about, there is something new learnt. Learners at this age need to get information on HIV/AIDS for awareness, preventi on and 
knowledge to help them avoid the epidemic. Much of the information available is in English, and in many of our cultures, talk ing about 
such topics has been a taboo. Bringing it up now in local language will enhance awareness. 
 
BACKGROUND 
In this topic, i t is intended that you use a text on HIV/AIDS which spells out the causes, effects, spread, misconceptions and  
prevention measures. You are expected to prepare the text or to photocopy captions which have the facts before you teach the  
lesson. You are al so expected to have read widely about HIV/AIDS so that you are informed. The text could also be used to teach 
comprehension, verbs, prepositions, tenses and even punctuation. 
Using group discussion, learners can be guided to come up with a guided composition. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOME 
The learner is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills of dealing with HIV/AIDS and use the right grammar to write a composition 
about it. 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Self-awareness 
Self-evaluation 
 
’éĘ Coping with emotions 
Being sensitive about other peopleŌĆÖs emotions. 
 
’éĘ Critical thinking 
Making the best use of the information you have. 


--- PAGE 94 ---
83 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads a text on HIV/AIDS. 
’éĘ Discusses a text on HIV/AIDS. 
’éĘ Writes a composition on HIV/AIDS. 
’éĘ Reads a poem on HIV/AIDS. 
 
’éĘ A text on HIV/AIDS focusing 
on: 
- What it is. 
- Ways it spreads. 
- Prevention. 
- Misconceptions. 
 
’éĘ Composition 
’éĘ A Poem 
 
’éĘ Reading a text on HIV/AIDS 
’éĘ Talking about the spread of HIV/AIDS. 
’éĘ Asking and answering questions. 
’éĘ Discussing the misconception held on 
HIV/AIDS. 
’éĘ Copying salient issues on HIV/AIDS e.g. 
what causes its transmission and 
prevention. 
’éĘ Writing a guided composition on HIV/AIDS. 
’éĘ Reciting a poem. 
’éĘ Reading a poem. 
’éĘ Discussing the messages in the poem. 
’éĘ Answering questions on the read poem. 
’éĘ Copies a poem on HIV/AIDS. 
’éĘ Answers written questions. 
’éĘ Constructs sentences using the 
present tense. 
’éĘ Writes legibly. 
Guided composition using 
present simple tense. 
’éĘ Talking about the choice of a topic. 
’éĘ Constructing sentences in the present tense. 
’éĘ Writing a composition. 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
’éĘ Make research about HIV/AIDS and either prepare or photocopy a text with facts on AIDS. 
’éĘ Hold a discussion with learners to gauge how much they know about HIV/AIDS in terms of definition, spread, prevention and 
effects. 
’éĘ As the discussion progresses, record important points on the blackboard. 
’éĘ Give a brief introduction on the text, and group the learners in preparation for reading the text, set the learners to read with a 
purpose. 
’éĘ When the learners are through with the text, give oral questions about the text. 
’éĘ Give written questions to be answered in writing individually. 
’éĘ Demonstrate the correct use of present simple tense and ask learners to make similar sentences. 


--- PAGE 95 ---
84 
 
 
 
’éĘ Lead the learners to discuss the topics in line with HIV/AIDS. 
’éĘ Remind the learners about the principles of writing a composition and set them to write individually. 
’éĘ Either put up a chart with a poem on HIV/AIDS, or on any other disease or proverbs referring to HIV/AIDS or its effects. Guide the 
learners to read it several times. 
’éĘ Lead the learners to answer questions on the poem. 
’éĘ Summaries the important points on HIV/ AIDS and let learners copy them in their books. 
 
TOPIC 3: LETTER WRITING 
RATIONALE 
Letter writing is a way of conveying an intended message to another per son in written form. In this topic, learners will acquire 
knowledge and skills of writing informal letters.  This will facilitate their communications with friends and the society the y live in at  
large. 
 
BACKGROUND 
In this topic, you are expected to give learners plenty of practice in writing informal letters and compositions. There should be more 
emphasis put on the use of future tense and conditional sentences that is the ŌĆśifŌĆÖ clause. The skills expected to be acquired  will help 
learners to communicate effectively. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOME 
The learner is able to write informal letters and compositions legibly and chronologically using the correct punctuations and tenses. 
 
LIFE SKILLS 
’éĘ Effective communication 
Writing meaningful letters 
 
’éĘ Assertiveness 
Expressing oneŌĆÖs point of view 
 
’éĘ Coping with stress 
Talking about personal problems 


--- PAGE 96 ---
85 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains what an informal letter is. 
’éĘ Identifies parts of an informal letter. 
’éĘ Writes an informal letter with 
punctuation marks and proper 
tenses. 
 
’éĘ Informal letters 
’éĘ Parts of an informal letter 
’éĘ Punctuation marks 
’éĘ Tenses 
 
’éĘ Reading samples of informal letters. 
’éĘ Writing a letter to a friend. 
’éĘ Organizing ideas chronologically. 
’éĘ Writing legibly. 
’éĘ Using punctuation marks correctly. 
’éĘ Using tenses correctly. 
’éĘ Reads and comprehends a text on 
peace education. 
’éĘ A text on peace education ’éĘ Reading a text on peace. 
’éĘ Answering written questions. 
’éĘ Completing sentences. 
’éĘ Completes sentences using given word / 
words correctly. 
’éĘ Discusses parts of a composition 
and writes about peace education. 
’éĘ Composition on peace education ’éĘ Reading a sample composition. 
’éĘ Writing a composition on a given topic. 
’éĘ Identifies a topic to write on. 
’éĘ Organizes the plot for the story. 
’éĘ Uses correct tenses. 
’éĘ Interprets proverbs. 
’éĘ Reads proverbs. 
’éĘ Oral literature (proverbs) ’éĘ Reading proverbs. 
’éĘ Completing proverbs. 
’éĘ Copying proverbs. 
 
 
GUIDANCE TO THE TEACHER 
’éĘ Hold a brain storming session to find out how much learners know about informal letters. 
’éĘ Use the sample letters you have to explain the reasons for writing and the presentation. 
’éĘ Emphasize salient issues like addresses, punctuation, date, chronological presentation of ideas, being brief, margins and 
grammar. 


--- PAGE 97 ---
86 
 
 
 
’éĘ Have sample letters, a text on peace education and a story on a chart for learners to read and identify salient parts of a letter.  
Have a collection of proverbs. 
’éĘ Use conditional sentences (if) and future simple tense as you present each item. 
’éĘ Encourage learners to use punctuation marks correctly as they read and write. 
’éĘ Emphasize legibility as they write. 
’éĘ Guide learners to practice writing informal letters either in groups or individually. 
’éĘ Present the text on peace education and explain briefly what it is about. 
’éĘ Group learners and instruct them to read silently as you supervise. 
’éĘ Organize for the answering of questions either orally or in writing or a filling in exercise. 
’éĘ Guide a discussion on things that can cause or disrupt peace. 
 
Note:  These will give clues to aspects which can be used as titles. 
’éĘ Guide a discussion to revise the parts of a composition and use one of the topics you have on the blackboard. 
’éĘ As a class, let learners generate the plot of the composition through questions and answers. 
’éĘ Demonstrate how this plot can be used when writing a composition. 
’éĘ Use that sample to revise the major parts of a composition. 
’éĘ Ask learners to write a composition on a peace-related topic. 
’éĘ Provide proverbs and ask learners to generate more proverbs. 
’éĘ Guide learners to copy the proverbs generated with proper spelling and punctuation. 
 
Note: Your chart containing proverbs could be pinned up in class for further reading. 


--- PAGE 98 ---
87 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I: ON HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS (SAMPLE) 
 
1. All persons are equal before the law. 
2. A person should not be discriminated against on grounds of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed, religion, 
socio-economic standing, political opinion or disability. 
3. Only courts of law can pass a valid death sentence. 
4. The life of an unborn child may not be terminated except as authorized by law. 
5. No person shall be deprived of his personal liberty unless he has committed an offence and has been proved guilty by court of 
competent jurisdiction. 
6. Nobody shall be subjected to any form of torture. 
7. Slavery is prohibited. 
8. Unlawful search of a person, his/ her home or other property is prohibited. 
9. A person is presumed innocent until proved guilty or unless he / she plead guilty. 
10. Women shall be accorded full and equal dignity with men. 
11. Laws and traditions that undermine the status and rights of women are prohibited. 
12. The state is under the obligation to support disabled persons in development. 
13. Minorities have a right to participate in decision-making in order to articulate their interest. 
14. Every person has the right to practice his/her profession and to carry out any lawful trade or business. 
15. Union has a right to unionize for the protection and advancement of their interest. 


--- PAGE 99 ---
88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mathematics 


--- PAGE 100 ---
89 
 
 
 
Introduction 
This mathematics syllabus has been divided into six themes and twelve topics. 
The Themes are: Sets, Numeracy, Interpretation of Graphs and Data, Measurements, Geometry and Algebra. 
 
The topics include: 
’éĘ Set concepts 
’éĘ Whole numbers 
’éĘ Operations on whole numbers 
’éĘ Patterns and sequences 
 
’éĘ Fractions. 
’éĘ Data handling 
’éĘ Money 
’éĘ Time 
 
’éĘ Length, Mass and Capacity 
’éĘ Lines, Angles and Geometric figures. 
’éĘ Integers 
’éĘ Algebra 
 
 
The scope and sequence has been designed in such a way that the topics have been further broken down into manageable teachabl e 
sub-topics. The material in this mathematics syllabus differs markedly from the traditional Mathematics in tha t it is more directly 
concerned with application of mathematics in everyday life. A brief background has been made for each topic, which lays a fir m 
foundation for the concept to be developed. 
 
Mathematics has been allocated six (6) lessons per week. Some of the exercises are supposed to be done outside the allocated time. 
Encourage the learners to always do maths in their time. 
 
Rationale 
The constant use of the mathematical approach to situations and formation of important concepts are the main aims of th is syllabus. 
Often familiar facts are emphasized to illustrate a mathematical idea so that a concept can be firmly established before bein g used to 
discover new facts. 
 
Throughout the primary school, emphasis should be laid on recording, reporting and discussing investigations carried out. 
 
Mental mathematics and its integration into other subjects must be encouraged. This will in turn make the learning of mathema tics 
much easier and interesting. Remember the learner may know much more than you expect him/h er to know. Practical work will 
therefore play a big role in consolidating what the learner already knows before new ideas are brought in. 
 
A four step plan is one of the strategies a mathematics teacher and learner may use to solve a problem.  Understandi ng the problem  
is the first step to solving it. 


--- PAGE 101 ---
90 
 
 
 
 
 
UNDERSTAND ’éĘ Read and understand the problem. 
’éĘ Know what is given and what you have to find. 
PLAN ’éĘ Make a plan. 
’éĘ Choose a problem-solving strategy. 
WORK ’éĘ Carry out the plan. 
’éĘ Use the strategy and do any necessary calculations. 
ANSWER ’éĘ Check any calculations and answer the problem. 
’éĘ Interpret the answer if necessary. 
 
This syllabus if well implemented will go a long way in providing a foundation to a dynamic society. 
 
 
SCOPE AND SEQUENCE 
THEME 1: SETS 
 
TOPIC: Set Concepts 
In the previous classes, the learner was introduced to the concept of sets. This continues with the work on sets that has already been 
covered. The task for the teacher is to help learners draw examples from everyday life related to sets. As you introduce them to Venn 
diagrams and some notation in sets, they need enough practical work to master correct use of symbols and language used in set 
concepts. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to demonstrate the knowledge of sets to solve problems in real life situations. 
 
Life Skills: Critical thinking, creative thinking, effective communication. 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Forms sets. 
’éĘ Names and 
describes the sets. 
’éĘ Sets 
- Equivalent 
’éĘ Forming and drawing the sets. 
’éĘ Drawing Venn diagrams. 


--- PAGE 102 ---
91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies the union 
and intersection of 
sets using Venn 
diagrams. 
’éĘ Distinguishes 
equal sets from 
equivalent sets. 
- Empty 
- Equal 
- Union of sets 
- Intersection of sets 
’éĘ Venn diagrams. 
’éĘ Identifying members of the union and 
intersection of sets on the Venn 
diagram. 
’éĘ Drawing Venn diagrams and using 
them. 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
- Let the learners form different sets of objects of different colours, shapes and different numbers. 
- The learners should pick two sets and compare the number of members of each set to find out whether the sets are equal or 
equivalent. 
- The learners should identify the common members of the sets being compared. 
- Guide the learners to draw Venn diagrams. 
- Introduce different shapes of Venn diagrams to the learners. 
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Form sets 
2. Draw Venn diagrams to show union and intersection of sets. 
3. Write down the union and intersection of sets from given sets. 
 
 
THEME 2:    NUMERACY 
 
TOPIC: 1      Whole Numbers 
 
This topic provides the basis for learners to develop the attitude of determination to solve problems in real life by calculation. It is when 
the learner can properly count, read and write whole numbers that he/she can eventually be introduced to operations on number s. Let 
the learner use examples of real objects, such as cows, goats, chairs, etc. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to appreciate the need of counting in everyday life and work with whole numbers up to 999,999. 


--- PAGE 103 ---
92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Life Skills 
’éĘ Critical thinking.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Problem-solving.’ĆĀ
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies place value of 
each digit in 6 digit 
numbers. 
’éĘ Finds values of digits. 
’éĘ Expands six digit 
numbers. 
’éĘ Rounds off whole 
numbers to the nearest 
ten thousands. 
’éĘ Reads and writes Roman 
numerals. 
’éĘ Names place values up 
to millions. 
 
’éĘ Reads numbers in 
expanded form. 
 
’éĘ Writes expanded 
numbers in words. 
’éĘ Reads and writes Roman 
numerals up to fifty in 
words. 
’éĘ Numbers 
- Place value 
- Value up to 999,999. 
- Natural numbers up to 
999,999. 
- Rounding off whole 
numbers to nearest 
10,000. 
- Roman numerals. 
’éĘ Identifying place values up to 6 
digits. 
’éĘ Working out values of digits. 
’éĘ Rounding off whole numbers. 
’éĘ Reading and writes Roman 
numerals. 
’éĘ Converting Hindu ŌĆō Arabic 
numerals to Roman and vice 
versa. 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
- Let the learners make abaci. The abacus should be used in naming and identifying place values. 
- Help the learners to round off the numbers using abacus. The meaning of placing a small Roman numeral on the left or right hand 
side of the bigger Roman numeral should be emphasized to the learners. 
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Name place values up to hundred thousandŌĆÖs. 
2. Read and writes whole numbers up to 999,999. 
 
TOPIC: 2 Operations on whole numbers 
This topic should not be handled in isolation. The learner should be helped to realize that everyday they add something to another.  
For instance they add sugar to tea, salt to soup, welcome other members to our families, etc. 


--- PAGE 104 ---
93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Always relate these operations to real life and bring out other words that will consolidate the concepts further, for example increase, 
decrease, reduce, more, less. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to use the four basic operations to solve problems. 
 
Life Skills: Critical thinking. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
- Adds whole numbers up 
to 6 digits with or without 
regrouping. 
- Solves word problems. 
’éĘ Describing the meaning of 
addition verbally. 
’éĘ Reading word problems 
aloud. 
’éĘ Addition of whole 
numbers. 
’éĘ Computing problems 
involving addition. 
’éĘ Solving simple word problems 
in real life situations. 
- Subtracts whole 
numbers up to 6 digits 
with or without 
regrouping. 
- Solves simple word 
problems. 
’éĘ Using other terms 
correctly for subtraction 
such as decrease, take 
away, minus, less than in 
English sentences. 
’éĘ Reading word problems 
verbally. 
’éĘ Subtraction of whole 
numbers. 
’éĘ Computing problems 
involving subtraction. 
’éĘ Reading and solving simple 
word problems in real life 
situations. 
- Multiplies numbers up to 
4 digits by 2 digit natural 
numbers. 
- Interprets and solves 
word problems. 
’éĘ Using correct 
mathematical terms for 
multiplication in 
sentences. 
’éĘ Playing games involving 
multiplication tables. 
’éĘ Multiplication by 2 digit 
natural numbers. 
’éĘ Multiplying up to 4 digit 
numbers by 2 digit numbers. 
’éĘ Reading and solving simple 
word problems in real life 
situations. 
- Divides whole numbers 
by 2 digit numbers with 
or without remainders. 
- Solves simple word 
problems. 
’éĘ Correctly using 
mathematical terms for 
division e.g. divided by, 
share, quotient, dividend 
in sentences. 
’éĘ Division of whole 
numbers by 2 digit 
numbers. 
’éĘ Working out division sums 
describing each step. 
’éĘ Reading and solving word 
problems in real life 
situations. 


--- PAGE 105 ---
94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 ’éĘ Interpreting word 
problems. 
  
- Uses the operations of 
addition, subtraction, 
multiplication and 
division to solve 
problems in real life 
situations. 
’éĘ Interpreting problems 
involving the four basic 
operations. 
’éĘ Mixed operations ’éĘ Reading and solving real life 
problems. 
- Counts, adds and 
subtracts numbers in 
Base Five. 
’éĘ Counts numbers in Base 
Five. 
’éĘ Numbers in Base Five. ’éĘ Counting numbers in Base 
Five. 
’éĘ Computing problems 
involving addition and 
subtraction of numbers in 
Base Five. 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs notes 
- Learners should be encouraged to use concrete objects when they are carrying out operations on numbers. 
- Encourage your learners to always read aloud the mathematical problems to the whole class. 
- Learners should always be reminded of the place values while carrying out operations on numbers. 
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Add numbers up to 6 digits. 
2. Subtract numbers up to 6 digits. 
3. Multiply numbers up to 4 digits by 2 digit numbers. 
4. Divide whole numbers by 2 digit numbers. 
 
 
5. Use the four operations on whole numbers in word 
problems. 
6. Add and subtract numbers in Base Five. 


--- PAGE 106 ---
95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC 3: Patterns and Sequences 
 
New ideas like Lowest Common Multiple, Highest Common Factor, increasing and decreasing progression must be introduced 
gradually. 
 
Use of mental work may be helpful in stimulating the learnersŌĆÖ computation skills. 
 
Learners will need a variety of patterns and sequence in order to discover the difference between the two and how one leads to the 
other. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to relate and apply simple computation skills involving patterns and sequence in real life situations. 
 
Life Skills -  
Critical thinking. 
Creative thinking. 
Problem-solving. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
- Forms patterns using 
increasing and decreasing 
progression. 
- Identifies triangular, square 
and composite numbers. 
- Prime numbers 
- Works out the L.C.M and 
G.C.F 
’éĘ Names and sequences 
types of numbers. 
 
’éĘ Describes what LCM 
and GCF are. 
’éĘ Types of numbers 
’éĘ Factors and multiples 
of whole numbers. 
’éĘ LCM and GCF. 
’éĘ Identifying and listing the 
types of numbers. 
’éĘ Listing factors and multiples 
of numbers. 
’éĘ Finding the LCM and GCF. 
- Uses types of numbers to 
form number patterns and 
sequences. 
- Describes and solves number 
patterns and sequences. 
’éĘ Names types of 
numbers to form 
number patterns. 
’éĘ Number patterns. 
’éĘ Types of numbers 
’éĘ Using the types of numbers 
to form and solve number 
patterns. 


--- PAGE 107 ---
96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
Various patterns and sequences should be introduced to learners. Avoid giving examples only based on the common patterns and 
sequences. Let the learners form their own patterns and sequences and ask their colleagues to solve them. 
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Recognize types of numbers. 
2. Read and write patterns and sequences of the different types of numbers. 
3. Calculate the LCM and GCF. 
 
 
TOPIC 4:      Fractions  
 
The idea of LCM and GCF will practically help the learner in working out the operations of addition and subtraction. Slowly, help them 
to use the idea of equiv alent fractions, then L.C.M in adding and subtracting fractions. Emphasize to the learners concepts of reading 
and writing fractions correctly. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to solve problems involving fractions and relating them to real life situations. 
 
Life Skills: 
Effective communication. 
Problem-solving. 
 
Subject Competences Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Activities 
- Adds and subtracts 
fractions with different 
denominators. 
’éĘ Reading and solving 
problems involving 
fractions with 
different 
denominators. 
’éĘ Addition and 
subtraction of fractions 
with different 
denominators. 
’éĘ Adding fractions with different 
denominators. 
’éĘ Subtracting fractions with 
different denominators. 
- Multiplies fractions by ’éĘ Reading and solving ’éĘ Multiplication of ’éĘ Multiplying fractions by fractions. 


--- PAGE 108 ---
97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proper fractions. 
- Multiplies fractions by 
natural numbers. 
problems involving 
multiplication of 
fractions. 
fractions. ’éĘ Multiplying fractions by natural 
numbers. 
- Divides proper fractions 
by proper fractions. 
- Divides fractions by 
natural numbers and 
vice versa. 
- Interprets and solves 
problems in real life 
situations. 
’éĘ Reading and solving 
problems involving 
division of fractions. 
’éĘ Division of fractions. ’éĘ Dividing proper fractions by 
proper fractions. 
’éĘ Dividing fractions by natural 
numbers. 
 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
’éĘ Bring out the concept of fractions with different denominators clearly by letting the learners cut parts of a whole object. The parts 
should be of different sizes.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Let the learners name the parts they have cut as fractions of the whole object.’ĆĀ
’éĘ The fractions named will have different denominators.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Now let two or more learners put together (add) their parts.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Ask them to name the new parts formed as a fraction of the original object.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Revise the multiples of numbers and equivalent fractions.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Learners should be helped to realize that to add or subtract fractions with different denominators, the knowledge of equivalent 
fractions and multiples is applied.’ĆĀ
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Carry out the four fundamental operations on fractions. 
2. Solve real life problems related to fractions. 


--- PAGE 109 ---
98 
 
 
 
 
 
TERM II 
 
THEME 2:    NUMERACY 
 
TOPIC 1:      Fractions 
 
Learners can be helped to read words like tenths and hundredths correctly. They must distinguish between the two and a number  line 
will be of great help, if properly used. Then introduce to them addition and subtraction. There is also need to emphasize pla ce value in 
order to add or subtract decimals. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to solve problems involving decimals related to real life situations. 
 
Life skills 
Effective communication. 
Problem-solving. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 


--- PAGE 110 ---
99 
 
 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies place values of 
each digit up to 
hundredths. 
’éĘ Finds the values of digits 
in decimals. 
’éĘ Compares decimals on a 
number line. 
’éĘ Converts decimals to 
fractions and vice versa. 
’éĘ Adds and subtracts 
decimals up to 
hundredths. 
’éĘ Solves word problems. 
’éĘ Names the place 
values. 
 
 
’éĘ Reads and writes 
values of decimals in 
words. 
 
 
’éĘ Reads aloud and solves 
problems involving 
decimals. 
’éĘ Reads and interprets 
word problems. 
’éĘ Place value of decimals 
up to hundredths. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Decimals on number 
lines. 
 
’éĘ Conversion of decimals 
to fractions and vice 
versa. 
’éĘ Addition and subtraction 
of decimals up to 
hundredths. 
’éĘ Finding place value and 
values of digits of numbers. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Ordering decimals using a 
number line. 
’éĘ Converting decimals to 
fractions and vice versa. 
’éĘ Adding and subtracting 
decimals up to hundredths. 


--- PAGE 111 ---
10
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
Revise a number line of whole numbers. 
Put decimal numbers on a number line. 
Lead the learners to understand that the place values for decimals start from tenth to hundredth and so on but they are to read from 
left to right and the value decrease from left to the right. 
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Use place value of digits to find values. 
2. Arrange decimal fractions in order of size. 
3. Convert decimal to vulgar fractions. 
4. Add decimal fractions. 
5. Subtract decimal fractions. 
6. Solve simple word problems involving decimals. 
 
 
THEME 3: GEOMETRY 
 
TOPIC: Lines, Angles and Geometrical figures 
 
The concept of geometry is intended to seek opportunities for drawing mathematical experience out of a wide range of activiti es and 
this includes identification and recognition of geometric figures like circles a nd regular polygons. Measurement and symmetry arise 
frequently in Art and Technology and many patterns have some geometric basis. It is therefore important that the practical ap proach 
be used as much as possible in order for the learner to conceive these ideas. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to recognize and constructs various geometric figures and relates them to other fields such as architectural 
drawings. 
 
Life Skills 
Creative thinking. 
Effective communication. 
Problem-solving. 


--- PAGE 112 ---
100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
- Draws and 
identifies parallel 
and perpendicular 
lines. 
- Draws and 
measures angles. 
- Constructs circles 
and regular 
hexagons. 
- Describes lines of 
symmetry. 
’éĘ Identifies parallel and 
perpendicular lines. 
 
 
’éĘ Labels angles. 
’éĘ Reads and writes English 
sentences about the angles. 
 
 
’éĘ Describes in English the parts 
of circles. 
’éĘ Parallel and perpendicular. 
 
’éĘ Angles. 
 
’éĘ Circles and regular 
hexagons. 
 
’éĘ Simple lines of folding 
symmetry 
- rectangle 
- square 
- special triangles. 
’éĘ Constructs parallel lines. 
’éĘ Gives examples of parallel 
lines in their environment. 
’éĘ Uses geometric instruments 
to construct angles, circles 
and regular hexagons. 
’éĘ Practically folds various 
models to recognize and 
identify lines of folding 
symmetry. 
’éĘ Folding to form lines of 
symmetry. 
- Draws diagrams 
to show rotations 
and revolutions. 
’éĘ Names examples of rotations. 
’éĘ Follows instructions to draw 
rotations and revolutions. 
’éĘ Rotations and revolutions. ’éĘ Constructs rotations using 
their toes, pegs. 
 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
’éĘ Learners should identify objects in the classroom which have parallel and perpendicular sides.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Encourage learners to have their own geometry sets.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Guide the learners in drawing parallel and perpendicular lines.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Practically, help the learners to construct a hexagon as you observe them carry out construction.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Learners fold square, rectangular, triangular papers from lines of symmetry. After the practice, learners can describe what a line of 
symmetry is.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 113 ---
101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Construct parallel lines. 
2. Use geometric instruments to construct angles, circles and regular hexagons. 
3. Identify lines of folding symmetry. 
4. Construct rotations and revolutions. 
 
THEME 4:     INTERPRETATION OF GRAPHS AND DATA 
 
TOPIC 3:      Data handling 
 
Graphs are b eing used more and more in our daily life to present information in an interesting form. It is therefore important that 
learners be trained to read them. Learners should also be given enough practice in drawing them to ensure that they can apply  the 
knowledge they have gained. Let them discover how information can be summarized into graphs. 
 
Learners will easily acquire the intended skills if you make this topic fun and involve them in teams especially in the case of large 
classes. Let them discover how information can be summarized into graphs. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to interpret and solve problems involving graphs. 
 
Life skills 
Effective communication. 
Critical thinking. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
- Draws and recognizes 
scales on the horizontal 
and vertical axes. 
- Represents and interprets 
data on bar and line 
’éĘ Reads scales on the 
horizontal and vertical axes. 
 
’éĘ Reads and interprets 
information on bar and line 
graphs. 
’éĘ Scales on the 
horizontal and vertical 
axes. 
 
’éĘ Bar graphs. 
’éĘ Drawing graphs. 
’éĘ Representing and 
interpreting data on 
graphs. 
’éĘ Working out average of 
given data. 


--- PAGE 114 ---
102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
graphs. 
- Determines and uses the 
average of the bar and 
line graphs. 
 ’éĘ Line graphs. 
 
’éĘ Average. 
 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
This topic should be practical, for example, learners can be tasked to find out how they scored in the previous term. Let them record 
the marks scored and find the number of learners who scored those marks. 
 
Let them record their findings in a table. Let the learners plot the number of learners on the Y-axis and marks scored on the X-axis. 
Guide them to draw graphs. 
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Draw graphs. 
2. Represent and interpret graphs. 
3. Work out average of data. 
 
 
TOPIC 4: Time 
 
This topic must at all cost be practical. It is through this that the learner will be able to read and write time correctly. Real clock faces 
will be a source of emphasizing phrases such as minutes to or minutes past. 
 
Finding duration must be introduced gradually because it sometimes involves conversion of units of time. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to appreciate and apply the knowledge of time in real life situations. 
 
Life Skills: 
Effective communication. 
Decision-making. 
Problem-solving. 


--- PAGE 115 ---
103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
- Tells time on the 12 hour 
clock. 
- Recognizes minutes and 
seconds. 
- Finds duration. 
- Solves problems related 
to time, distance and 
speed. 
’éĘ Reads and tells time 
verbally on the 12 hour 
clock. 
’éĘ Constructs sentences 
involving phrases of time. 
’éĘ Time on the 12 hour 
clock. 
 
 
’éĘ Duration. 
’éĘ Time, distance and 
speed. 
’éĘ Reading and telling time up to 
the second. 
’éĘ Working out duration, given 
two points of time. 
’éĘ Calculating speed, distance 
and time using simple word 
problems. 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
’éĘ Bring a physical (real) clock for the learners to see.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Identify an hour, a minute and a second.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Let the learners practice how to write time.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Guide learners on how the phrases a.m. and p.m. are used.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Introduce duration by using time in the same phase i.e. starting and ending time is either a.m. or p.m.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Lead the learners in finding the relationship between speed, time and distance.’ĆĀ
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Tell time on the 12 hour clock. 
2. Convert hours to minutes and vice versa. 
3. Find duration. 
4. Solve word problem involving time, distance and speed. 


--- PAGE 116 ---
104 
 
 
 
 
 
TERM III 
 
THEME: MEASUREMENTS 
 
Topic 1: Money 
 
Since the learner has some background about money, refer to that as a foundation. In this class, insist on solving practical problems 
related to utilization of Uganda currency in everyday life situations. Use practical approaches as much as possible. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to solve practical problems related to utilization of Uganda currency in everyday life. 
 
Life Skills 
Problem-solving. 
Logical thinking. 
Effective communication. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
’éĘ Solves practical problems 
related to buying and selling 
using Uganda currency. 
’éĘ Costs and prices. 
’éĘ Computes simple profit and 
loss. 
’éĘ Role plays buying and 
selling using Uganda 
currency. 
’éĘ Uses practical examples 
to describe simple profit 
and loss. 
’éĘ Money. 
’éĘ Buying and selling. 
’éĘ Profit and loss. 
’éĘ Costs and prices. 
’éĘ Role playing buying and 
selling. 
’éĘ Computing and solving 
problems related to profit 
and loss. 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
’éĘ Use question and answer approach.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Let the learners role play the buying and selling.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Learners should orally discuss the profit and loss and identify which condition leads to profit or loss.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Let them relate buying, selling, profit and loss.’ĆĀ
 
Assessment Competence 
The learner is able to solve problems involving money. 


--- PAGE 117 ---
105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC 2: Length, Mass and Capacity 
 
This topic was explored in the previous classes. At this level, let the learners practice using standard i nstruments to measure length, 
mass and capacity accurately. Let them get involved in the practical measurement of length, mass and capacity before they can  work 
out area, perimeter and problems involving mass and capacity. Do also encourage guided co-operative learning. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to recognize and use standard instruments and units for measuring length, mass and capacity. 
 
Life Skills 
Critical thinking, 
Effective communication 
Problem-solving. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Converts mm to cm and 
vice versa. 
’éĘ Calculates area and 
perimeter. 
’éĘ Constructs sentences 
using cm, mm, perimeter. 
’éĘ Lengths in m, cm and 
mm. 
’éĘ Perimeters in cm and 
mm. 
’éĘ Areas in m2 and cm2. 
’éĘ Calculating perimeter and 
area of plane shapes like 
rectangles, squares and 
triangles. 
’éĘ Solves mathematical 
problems that involve 
mass. 
’éĘ Converts kg to g and vice 
versa. 
’éĘ Reads and interprets word 
problems involving mass. 
’éĘ Mass in kg and g. ’éĘ Working out problems 
involving mass. 
’éĘ Solves problems with the 
measurement of capacity. 
’éĘ Converts litres to m and 
vice versa. 
’éĘ Reads and interprets word 
problems involving 
capacity. 
’éĘ Capacity in litres and ml. ’éĘ Working out problems 
involving capacity. 


--- PAGE 118 ---
106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
’éĘ Using a meter rule, let the learners find out how many centimetre are in metre. Guide them on how converting from metre to 
centimetre and vice versa is done.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Get different containers marked with litres (l) and others marked milliliters (ml). Let the learners tell how many ml containers were 
used to fill the container marked l. Lead them in how to convert from litres to milliliters and vice versa.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Let the learners recall how many grams are in one kilograms. Guide them on how to convert from kg to g and vice versa.’ĆĀ
 
Assessment competences: 
The learner is able to: 
1. Calculate area and perimeter of plane figures. 
2. Solve word problems involving length, mass and capacity. 
 
 
THEME 2: NUMERACY 
 
Topic 3: Integers 
 
This is a new topic. Introduce it using the idea of the number line and do enough practical work with the learners. 
 
Then introduce operations without a number line but give learners practical examples and allow them to give many more similar 
examples.  By so doing, learners will slowly master the concept of integers. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to use the number line to properly work out problems related to integers. 
 
Life Skills 
Problem-solving. 
Critical thinking. 


--- PAGE 119 ---
107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
- Draws number lines. 
- Identifies positive and 
negative integers. 
’éĘ Describes positive and 
negative integers on number 
lines orally. 
’éĘ Positive and negative 
integers. 
’éĘ Using number lines to 
describe positive and 
negative integers. 
- Arranges integers. ’éĘ Describes what ŌĆ£ordering 
integersŌĆØ is. 
’éĘ Ordering integers. ’éĘ Writing integers in ascending 
or descending order. 
- Uses symbols =, <, >, 
to compare integers. 
’éĘ Explains phrases like less 
than, greater than or equal to, 
to compare integers. 
’éĘ Comparison of 
integers. 
’éĘ Comparing integers using 
symbols. 
- Adds integers. 
- Subtracts integers. 
’éĘ Describes addition and 
subtraction of integers. 
’éĘ Addition and 
subtraction of 
integers. 
’éĘ Adding and subtracting 
integers. 
- Solves simple word 
problems involving 
integers. 
’éĘ Reads word problems 
involving integers. 
’éĘ Simple word 
problems. 
’éĘ Solving simple word 
problems involving integers. 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
’éĘ Introduce integers using number line which has both positive and negative numbers. Starting from the point marked 0 (zero), 
describe forward movement as positive movement and backward movement as negative movement.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Positive movement is represented by positive numbers and negative movement by negative numbers.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Let the learners relate positive and negative numbers to profit and loss respectively and other daily life experiences.’ĆĀ
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
1. Draw number lines. 
2. Add integers. 
3. Subtract integers. 
4. Use symbols to compare integers. 
5. Solve simple word problems involving integers. 


--- PAGE 120 ---
108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THEME 6: ALGEBRA 
Topic 4: Algebra 
 
This is not a new topic since it has already been explored in the previous classes. However, at this level, learners must get actively 
involved in solving of algebra problems. Use examples that learners are familiar with to get them into forming algebraic expressions. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to solve mathematical problems and puzzles using the knowledge of algebra. 
 
Life Skills 
Critical thinking. 
Problem-solving. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
- Solves simple equations. 
- Collects like terms. 
- Forms algebraic 
expressions. 
- Solves simple word problems 
involving algebra. 
’éĘ Reads mathematical 
statements. 
’éĘ Uses words like simplify in 
sentences. 
’éĘ Reads algebraic expressions. 
’éĘ Reads word problems 
involving algebra. 
’éĘ True mathematical 
statements. 
’éĘ Like terms. 
’éĘ Expressions in 
algebra. 
’éĘ Simple word problems 
involving algebra. 
’éĘ Solving simple equations of 
one variable. 
’éĘ Collecting simple like terms. 
’éĘ Forming algebraic expressions. 
’éĘ Solving simple word problems 
involving algebra. 
 
TeacherŌĆÖs Notes 
’éĘ Introduce this topic by using a lot of mental work. Write the problem on the blackboard with numbers missing. Let the learners 
solve the missing number. Refer to the missing number as the unknown. Use the alphabet letters to represent the  unknown.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Introduce the term ŌĆ£like termsŌĆØ, guide the learners on how mathematical operations are carried out on ŌĆ£like termsŌĆØ and finally solve 
for the unknown.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Give many numbers to learners to solve on their own.’ĆĀ
 
Assessment Competences 
The learner is able to: 
’éĘ Solve equations.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Simplify algebraic expressions.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 121 ---
109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RELIGIOUS EDUCATION 


--- PAGE 122 ---
110 
 
 
 
 
 
(A) Christian Religious Education Syllabus 
 
RELIGIOUS EDUCATION 
Background 
This is Primary Five Religious Education Syllabus. In Primary 1 ŌĆō 3 learning is based on themes, learning outcomes and 
competences. Most of the religious related competences are covered under the literacy strands of the Thematic Curriculum. 
 
In Primary Four learning based on subjects and the Religious Education Syllabus outlined the learning outcomes, content and 
language competenc es. Learners in Primary Five are expected to have developed sufficient basic literacy skills both in local and 
English language. The teacher can now use only English as a medium of instruction. The teacher should take note that the conc epts 
are clear to en able the learners consolidate what was learnt in earlier classes.  The instructional process will follow what was in the  
old syllabus and the teachers will be required to use the old instructional materials. 
 
 
Rationale 
The revised Primary Five Religious Education syllabus has been designed to consolidate all the skills acquired from P.1 to P.4. It is 
also intended to provide the learner with knowledge on faith, other religions, hope, relationships, judgement, fasting, leade rship, good 
neighbourliness, importance of prayer among others. 
 
There have been changes made including reducing the content to keep the learning experience light and simple for the learners. 
’éĘ Language competences have been included in order to enforce literacy skills.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Subject competences and language competences have been included to replace specific objectives.  These competences focus 
on knowledge, comprehension and application.’ĆĀ
’éĘ General learning outcomes instead of general objective are also stipulated for each topic.’ĆĀ
’éĘ A background to introduce each of the topics has been provided. It further gives an overview of the whole topic and thus gives 
teacher an insight into the topic.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Content on Voter Education, sexual and Reproductive Health, life planning skills and child labour has been included. The teacher 
has been guided on how to teach it, resources for the teacher to consult have also been provided in the syllabus Matrix.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 123 ---
111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment Guidelines 
In principle continuous assessment is recommended and should be based on the summarized co mpetences suggested in each topic. 
All assessments of learning shall be based on the learning competences given in this syllabus. Besides the Continuous Assessm ent, 
there shall be end of term and end of year assessment carried out and records kept. 
 
General Methodology 
It is strongly suggested that the teacher uses those methods and activities which put the learner at the centre of the teachi ng/learning 
process. The active verbs used in expressing the learning competences are all directed to the learner. Th is implies that as a result of 
teaching/learning process, the learner should exhibit these competences. 
 
The teacher of Religious Education is expected to use a variety of books of the old curriculum. This will not enrich teachers  content  
but will help the teacher to prepare the correct contents of the topics. The teacher is expected to constantly help relate science to real 
life situations and experiences. Not all schools in Uganda may have same learning environment. The teacher should feel free t o use 
examples which provide the learner with the opportunity to acquire the same knowledge, concepts, skills, values and competences. 
 
The methods a teacher chooses to use should be those which contribute towards the achievement of competences, learning 
outcomes and eventually lead to the achievements of aims and objectives of primary education. They should be interactive in order to 
make the learning process interesting. 
 
General learning outcomes 
When learners go through this syllabus they will be able to: 
’éĘ Develop appreciation for faith and its importance to an individual.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explore the facts about Islam, appreciate its existence and articulate behaviours that build good relationships.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explain the fulfillment of GodŌĆÖs promise to save mankind.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Show knowledge of and take care of the people in need.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Express appreciation for the fact that God is the source of all Hope.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 124 ---
112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TERM I 
 
THEME 1: CHRISTIANITY AND GODŌĆÖS WORD 
TOPIC 1: FAITH  
 
Background to the Topic 
This topic presents the concept of faith. Faith is exemplified by some Bible characters in the personalities of Abraham, Moses and Daniel. 
It goes further to give examples of famous Christians who emulated the examples of some of the Bible characters to live faithful lives. 
 
To live a life of faith, we need examples to emulate and use guidance from GodŌĆÖs word. But the learner should also be helped to appreciate 
that the life of faith has challenges. The challenges can be overcome by perseverance. Help the learner to understand that we also need 
faith in authority like the constitution, Electoral Commission and the electoral process, just as we have faith in the Bible.  Assist the learner 
to define and identify types of values. 
 
Learning Outcome 
’éĘ The learner is able to understand and appreciate that faith is important in his/her life.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills 
’éĘ Critical thinking.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Decision-making.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Effective communication.’ĆĀ
 
Values 
’éĘ Faith’ĆĀ
’éĘ Perseverance’ĆĀ
’éĘ Co-operation’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 125 ---
113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
competences 
Language 
competences 
Content Suggested instructional 
strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
Explains the 
The learner: 
’éĘ Writes in his own 
words the 
meaning of 
faith/values. 
’éĘ Writes short 
notes on Bible 
characters. 
 
 
Talks in simple 
language about how 
some famous 
Christians 
expressed their 
faith. 
Meaning of faith and values 
Bible characters 
’éĘ Abraham ŌĆō Gen. 12: 1 ŌĆō 5, 17:5 
’éĘ Moses ŌĆō Exodus 1:15 ŌĆō 22, 2:1- 
10 
’éĘ Daniel 6:1 ŌĆō 28. 
 
Saints and Martyrs ŌĆō learning from 
their experience of faith. 
’éĘ Stephen ŌĆō Acts 7:54 ŌĆō 8:1 
’éĘ Acts 9:1 ŌĆō 31 
’éĘ St. Perpetual 
’éĘ Mbaga Tuzinde 
’éĘ Reading the Bible text. 
’éĘ Sharing experiences 
about faith. 
’éĘ Dramatizing 
the Bible characters like 
Daniel in a den of lions. 
’éĘ Answering questions 
about the text. 
’éĘ Group discussion on how 
some famous Christians 
expressed their faith. 
’éĘ Bible 
concept of  
faith and its  
values.  
’éĘ Explains how  
Bible  
Characters  
Expressed  
their faith.  
 Profiles of St. 
’éĘ Explains how 
some famous 
Christians 
expressed 
Perpetual and 
Mbaga Tuzinde 
and other Uganda 
Matyrs. 
their faith.  
’éĘ Describes how 
we can 
express faith 
in authority. 
’éĘ Answers 
questions about 
authority. 
Faith in authority 
’éĘ Constitution as an authority. 
’éĘ Electoral Commission as body 
that should express faith in 
authority. 
’éĘ Electoral process and the 
learners. 
’éĘ Identifying different types 
of authority. 
’éĘ Explaining how having 
faith in authority benefits 
the community. 
’éĘ The Uganda 
Constitution. 
’éĘ Voter 
Education 
Manual. 


--- PAGE 126 ---
114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Tells how one 
can grow in 
faith. 
’éĘ Tells stories on 
how one can 
grow in faith. 
Faith and perseverance 
’éĘ Relating life of faith to a race in 
which perseverance is  needed 
in order to win. 
1Tim 6: 12 
2Tim 2: 9 ŌĆō10 
Heb 10:23 
’éĘ Sharing experiences on 
how one grows in faith. 
’éĘ Reading and studying the 
Bible text. 
’éĘ Answering questions 
about the Bible text. 
’éĘ Discussing different types 
of values. 
’éĘ Bible. 
’éĘ Piascy 
materials. 
’éĘ Identifies 
types of 
values. 
’éĘ Writes down 
some values that 
help one in life. 
’éĘ Armed to face problems ŌĆō 
shield. 
Ephesians 6:10 ŌĆō 16 
Psalm: 91: 1-6 
Prov. 30:5 
’éĘ Types of values people need 
today 
Personal 
Family 
’éĘ Dramatic Bible reading. 
 
’éĘ Guided discussion and 
sharing of experiences by 
the learners. 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC 2:   Christianity and Islam 
 
Background to the Topic 
 
This topic is a comparative study of a few facts about Islam and Christianity. It is meant to help the learner appreciate the  fact that 
people seek God in different ways. The differences in seeking God should help pupils to live with others in a community based on 
respect and love having known that we are all creatures and seekers of God. 
 
This topic presents facts about Islamic and Christian beliefs in the principles of democracy. It also presents the learners with some 
knowledge of how to relate with others and how to sustain good relationships. When handling this topic, the teacher should use story 


--- PAGE 127 ---
115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
telling, brainstorming and question and answer and field visits (Mosque/Church). It is also important to use resource persons from the 
Islamic community. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to explore the facts about Islam, appreciate its existence, and articulate behaviours that build or destroy good 
relationships. 
 
Life skills 
’éĘ Decision-making.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Friendship formation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Self awareness.’ĆĀ
 
Values 
’éĘ Love’ĆĀ
’éĘ Tolerance’ĆĀ
’éĘ Appreciation’ĆĀ
 
Subject 
competences 
Language 
competences 
Content Suggested instructional 
strategies 
Resources 
The learner: The learner 
’éĘ Talks about 
the reasons 
for worshiping 
God. 
 
 
’éĘ Writes in short 
sentences on 
the history of 
Islam 
Facts about Islam ’éĘ Asking and answering 
questions. 
’éĘ Studying the information 
about the life of 
Mohammed. 
’éĘ Sharing what they know of 
the beliefs of Islam. 
’éĘ Interpreted 
QurŌĆÖan. 
’éĘ Simple books 
on Islam. 
’éĘ Mentions the ’éĘ Why we worship God 
reasons for 
worshiping 
God. 
’éĘ Allah 
’éĘ Mohammed 
 History of Islam 
 
’éĘ Explains the 
history of 
- Life of Mohammed 
- Beginning of Islam  as a religion 
Islam.  


--- PAGE 128 ---
116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies the 
similarities and 
differences 
between Islam 
and 
Christianity. 
’éĘ Explains 
Christian and 
Islamic beliefs 
and principles 
of democracy. 
 
 
’éĘ Identifies 
aspects from 
Christianity and 
Islam that 
develop good 
relationships. 
’éĘ Writes how 
they can show 
respect for 
people of 
different 
beliefs without 
losing their 
own. 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Writes a poem 
about good 
relationships. 
Muslims  beliefs and practices 
’éĘ Reading the QurŌĆÖan. 
’éĘ Pillars of Islam. 
’éĘ Similarities and differences with 
Christianity. 
’éĘ Islamic and Christian beliefs and 
principles of democracy. 
’éĘ Practices of democracy in 
Uganda. 
 
Relationships 
- Behaviour that can build or 
destroy relationships. 
- Sustaining good relationships. 
’éĘ Identifying the similarities 
and differences between 
Islam and Christianity. 
’éĘ Discussing the pillars of 
Islam. 
’éĘ Drawing the diagram of the 
five pillars of Islam. 
’éĘ Sharing views on the 
meaning of democracy and 
how it is practiced in 
Uganda. 
’éĘ Discussing about 
democracy and how it is 
practiced. 
 
 
’éĘ Brainstorming on activities 
that promote good 
relationships. 
’éĘ Copy of 
QurŌĆÖan. 
’éĘ Voter 
Education 
Manual. 
’éĘ News spirit 
’éĘ Piacy 
materials. 
’éĘ Ms Uganda 
materials on 
Democracy 
 
TOPIC 3:    GodŌĆÖs Word for Us 
 
Background to the Topic 
 
This topic presents to the learners GodŌĆÖs word: the Bible. It is meant to help the learner understand the uniqueness of the  Bible. 
It is important in that the learner understands that the Old Testament contains books which were written before the coming of Christ. 
They explain GodŌĆÖs intervention in the history of mankind and His promise to send a saviour. The New Testament is written aft er the 
coming of Jesus which is the fulfillment of GodŌĆÖs promise. 
 
Help the learner to understand the centrality of the Bible in the life of a Christian. The Bible teaches guides and corrects people. 


--- PAGE 129 ---
117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Help the learner to appreciate that as the Bible guides our way of life, the constitution does the same work of guidance to our lives. It 
is important to help learners to understand how to respond to the sources of guidance, that is the Bible and  Constitution. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to understand that the Bible presents GodŌĆÖs self-evaluation to man with the purpose of setting him/her free from 
trouble. 
 
Life skills 
’éĘ Critical thinking.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Self awareness.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Effective communication.’ĆĀ
 
Values 
’éĘ Co-operation’ĆĀ
’éĘ Appreciation’ĆĀ
’éĘ Obedience’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 130 ---
118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
competences 
Language 
competences 
Content Suggested instructional 
strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the Bible 
structures. 
 
’éĘ Identifies the 
different types of 
books in the Bible. 
 
’éĘ Explains why the 
Bible is a unique 
book. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Writes different 
books of the Bible. 
 
’éĘ Reads the Bible 
texts. 
The Bible 
’éĘ Unique book 
- Is. 40: 7-8, Psalm 
11:1-5, 
- Prov. 3: 1-2, Rom. 
15:4 
- Matt. 11:28 
’éĘ Two parts; 
- Old Testament and 
New Testament 
’éĘ Types of books 
- History and law books 
- History books 
- Poetry and wisdom books 
- Prophets 
- Jesus Biography 
- Letters 
- Revelation 
’éĘ Drawing the structure of 
the Bible. 
’éĘ Discussing the common 
characteristics of books. 
’éĘ Naming the different 
books in the Old and 
New Testament. 
’éĘ Bible 


--- PAGE 131 ---
119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Lists different 
ways God inspired 
people to write his 
word. 
’éĘ Writes different 
ways God inspired 
people to write his 
word. 
Different ways of teaching the 
truth 
’éĘ Psalms; 
118: 1 ŌĆō 4 
25: 4 ŌĆō 5 
51: 1 ŌĆō 2 
61: 1 ŌĆō 2 
 
’éĘ Proverbs 
11:25 
12:17-18 
23:13-14 
’éĘ Discussing different 
ways of learning about 
the word of God. 
’éĘ Interpreting the 
messages to the 
learners. 
’éĘ Relating the messages 
to their daily life. 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Identifies ways in 
which GodŌĆÖs word 
can be applied in 
his/her life. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Writes ways in 
which GodŌĆÖs word 
can be applied in 
his/her life. 
The Bible in our life 
’éĘ The Bible as out guide. 
- Matt 4:1 ŌĆō 11 
- Eph. 6:12 ŌĆō 13, 17 
’éĘ It corrects out ways 
- Psalms 119: 105 
- 2 Timothy 3:15-17 
’éĘ Discussing different 
ways in which GodŌĆÖs 
word can be applied in 
his/her life. 
’éĘ Bible 


--- PAGE 132 ---
120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Discusses how the 
Bible is relevant to 
our lives. 
’éĘ Explains how the 
constitution serves 
as guidance to the 
people. 
Reads Bible verses 
Recites the Bible 
verses. 
Our response to the Bible 
’éĘ Reading the Bible 
- Deut 17:18-20 
- Acts 8:27 ŌĆō 30 
- Revelation. 1:1-3 
’éĘ Listening to the Bible 
 
’éĘ Constitution as a source of 
guidance to our daily lives. 
’éĘ Group discussion on 
how the Bible changed 
peopleŌĆÖs lives. 
’éĘ Learners discuss what 
they have heard. 
- Mark 4: 1-9 
- Mark 4:13 -20 
- James 1:22 
 
’éĘ Sharing what they 
understand by 
constitution. 
’éĘ Discussing the 
constitution of Uganda 
and how it guides 
people. 
’éĘ Jesus and the children. 
- Children discuss what 
Jesus said about 
children. 
’éĘ Reading of the verses 
about children in the 
Bible. 
’éĘ Bible. 
’éĘ News print 
’éĘ The 
Uganda 
Constitution 


--- PAGE 133 ---
121 
 
 
 
 
 
TERM II 
 
TOPIC 4: GODŌĆÖS WORD FOR US: JESUS 
 
Background to the Topic 
This topic helps learners to see the Old Testament prophecies/promises of the Saviour fulfilled when Jesus Christ came to earth. 
 
It also shows/presents to the learner the exemplary teaching of Jesus and the need for repentance. You should stress in this topic 
the care which should be accorded to the sick especially those suffering from HIV/AIDS. 
 
It teaches the message of the Holy Week to help the learner appreciate the passion, death and resurrection of Jesus. While teaching 
this topic, use dramatization, story telling and role play. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to understand and explain the fulfilment of GodŌĆÖs promise to save mankind. 
 
Life skills 
’éĘ Problem-solving.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Critical thinking.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Effective communication.’ĆĀ
 
Value 
’éĘ Forgiveness’ĆĀ
’éĘ Care’ĆĀ
’éĘ Love’ĆĀ
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
 Content  Suggested activities Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Relates some 
Old Testament 
prophecies to 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads Bible texts. 
’éĘ Writes simple 
stories about a 
Fulfillment of prophecies 
’éĘ Old Testament 
Is 7:14, 53:4-9 
Zech. 9:9 
’éĘ Reading the Old 
Testament 
prophesies about 
Jesus and writing 
 


--- PAGE 134 ---
122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
the work of 
Jesus. 
promise that was 
fulfilled. 
Micah 5:2 
 
’éĘ New Testament 
Matt. 3:13-17, Matt 21: 1 - 
10 
Matt 12: 18-21 
what each Prophet 
foretold about Jesus. 
 
 
’éĘ Picture of 
Good News 
Bible New 
Testament 
pg. 119. 
 
 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Describes some 
of JesusŌĆÖ 
teachings. 
Reads some texts in 
the Bible. 
Jesus teaching 
’éĘ Need for repentance 
- Luke 15:11-24 
 
’éĘ Love for enemies 
Mat. 5:43 ŌĆō 45 
Luke 6:27-31 
 
’éĘ Receiving GodŌĆÖs word 
Luke 10:8 ŌĆō 16 
Mark 6: 1-6 
 
’éĘ Caring for the sick/needy 
Luke 4:18-19 
John 11: 25 - 26 
’éĘ Discussing situations 
where repentance 
and forgiveness are 
needed. 
’éĘ Dramatizing the story 
of the lost son. 
’éĘ Answering questions 
about the texts read. 
’éĘ Discussing PIACY 
how to care for 
materials people with 
HIV/AIDS, etc 
’éĘ Explains the 
importance of 
JesusŌĆÖ life, 
death and 
resurrection. 
’éĘ Talks about the 
importance of 
Jesus in his/her 
life. 
Message of Holy Week 
’éĘ Welcoming the King 
- John 12: 12- 19 
 
’éĘ Respecting GodŌĆÖs house 
- Luke 19: 45 ŌĆō 48 
- John 2:13-17 
’éĘ Dramatizing the 
events of the Last 
Supper. 
’éĘ Studying the Biblical 
texts. 
 
’éĘ Dramatic Bible 
reading of the texts. 
’éĘ Bible 


--- PAGE 135 ---
123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
  ’éĘ Remembering JesusŌĆÖ death. 
- Mark 14:22-25 
- 1Corinthians 11:23-26 
’éĘ Faith in Jesus 
’éĘ Love of God 
- 1John 4:7-21 
- 1Corinthians 13:4-8 
 
’éĘ Power of God 
Luke 24:1-12 
24:36-43 
 
’éĘ Dramatization of 
cleansing of the 
temple 
 
’éĘ Discussion of the 
Bible texts. 
 
’éĘ Writing of short 
prayers thanking 
Jesus for dying for 
our sins. 
 
’éĘ Singing an Easter 
song. 
 
 
 
TOPIC 5: We are the New People of God in the Spirit 
 
Background to the Topic 
This topic presents the coming of the Holy Spirit as promised by Christ after his resurrection, on the day of ŌĆ£PentecostŌĆØ. The learner 
is expected to be exposed to the work of the Holy Spirit, the gifts and the fruits that are bestowed on the followers of Christ. 
 
Help the learner to know/understand that symbols are used to represent the Holy Spirit since the spirit is invisible. It is also important 
to make children aware that since the founding of the church, the Holy Spirit has been actively at work. It is this same spirit that 
helped the Apostles Peter, John and Philip in their work of evangelization. 
 
Use story telling, brainstorming and discussion and role playing. Allow children to exchange ideas to enable them grasp the concept. 
 
Learning Outcome 


--- PAGE 136 ---
124 
 
 
 
 
 
The learner 
ii)  Able to understand and narrate the work of the Holy Spirit in the church. 
 
Life skills 
’éĘ Critical thinking’ĆĀ
’éĘ Problem-solving’ĆĀ
 
Values 
’éĘ Faith’ĆĀ
’éĘ Voluntarism’ĆĀ
’éĘ Co-operation’ĆĀ
’éĘ Helping’ĆĀ
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains the 
promise of the 
Holy Spirit. 
 
’éĘ Describes the 
fulfillment of the 
promise of the 
Holy Spirit. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Tells the promise of 
the Holy Spirit. 
’éĘ Reads the text on 
the promise of the 
Holy Spirit. 
Coming of the Holy Sprit 
’éĘ Promise for the Holy Spirit 
John 16:5-15 
- Acts 1:8 
’éĘ Fulfillment 
- Acts 2:1 ŌĆō 13 
- John  1: 1 - 3 
’éĘ Discussing the 
importance of 
keeping the promise. 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Identifies the 
gifts and fruits of 
the Holy Spirit. 
’éĘ Reads the Bible text 
about gifts and fruits 
of the Holy Spirit. 
The work of the Holy Spirit 
’éĘ Seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. 
-1 Corinthians 12:4-11 
 
’éĘ Fruits of the Holy Spirit 
- Gal 5: 22 - 23 
’éĘ Studying Acts 2: 1-3 
and telling how the 
Holy Spirit came at 
Pentecost. 


--- PAGE 137 ---
125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
’éĘ Explains some 
symbols of the 
Holy Spirit. 
’éĘ Writes the symbols 
of the Holy Spirit. 
Symbols of the Holy Spirit 
- Dove 
- Wind John1:32 
- Fire  John 3:7-8 
John 20:21-22 
Acts 2:3-4 
’éĘ Discussing the 
meaning of symbols 
of the Holy Spirit. 
’éĘ Drawing the symbols 
of the Holy Spirit. 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Identifies  work 
of the Holy Spirit 
in lives of some 
individuals in the 
early church. 
 
 
’éĘ Gives the 
aspects of the 
work of the Holy 
Spirit in the 
Church today. 
’éĘ Reads and writes 
simple sentences 
about Stephen, 
Philip, Peter and 
John. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Writes short 
sentences about 
roles of men and 
women in church. 
The Holy Spirit in the Church 
’éĘ Stephen 
- Acts 6:8-15, 7:1-60 
 
’éĘ Philip 
- Acts 8:26-40 
- Luke 12:11-12 
 
’éĘ Peter and John 
- Acts 3: 1 -10 
’éĘ Gender roles and equality 
in the church. 
- Role of women in the 
church. 
- Gender equality . 
’éĘ Role playing 
situations when one 
may be unable to do 
a task and needs 
help. 
’éĘ Studying stories of 
Stephen, Philip, 
Peter and John and 
identifying how they 
were changed by the 
Holy Spirit. 
’éĘ Doing an exercise 
about gender roles in 
the church. 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ News print 
’éĘ PIACY 
materials. 


--- PAGE 138 ---
126 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC 6:    We are the Church 
Background to the Topic 
In this Topic, learners are exposed to the concept of the church not only as a building or a group believers in Christ, but also as a 
Body of Christ. 
 
Learners get knowledge of the responsibilities of church members. This topic, also teaches learners about how a person becomes a 
member of the church.  Once someone becomes a member of the church, he is given instructions.  Those instructions are contain ed 
in ApostleŌĆÖs creed. The learners need to understand that the church is a community of believers who have activities to do together. 
 
You can use story telling, question and answer and group discussions while teaching this topic. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to explore and document, appreciate and explain the importance being a church member and the responsibilities 
he/she has to accomplish for the church. 
 
Life skills 
’éĘ Self -awareness’ĆĀ
’éĘ Decision -making’ĆĀ
 
Values 
’éĘ Faith’ĆĀ
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the 
characteristics and 
nature of the 
church as the body 
of Christ. 
 
’éĘ Describes the 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads the Bible 
references. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Writes in short 
Nature of the church 
’éĘ Characteristics of the church; 
the body of Christ. 
- 1Corithians 12:12 
- Romans 12: 4-5 
- Colossians 1:17 -18 
’éĘ Responsibilities of church 
’éĘ Discussing the 
characteristics of the 
church members. 
 
 
’éĘ Brainstorming on 
responsibilities of 
’éĘ Bible 


--- PAGE 139 ---
127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
duties of church 
members. 
sentences the duties 
of church members. 
members church members.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Copy of the 
Apostles 
Creed 
 
 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Newsprint 
’éĘ Pictures 
reflecting 
different 
professions 
’éĘ Explains how one 
becomes a member 
of the church. 
 
’éĘ Explains the terms 
ŌĆ£Baptism and 
Conformation. 
 
’éĘ Describes what is 
meant by the world 
wide Communion of 
Saints. 
’éĘ Writes what he/she 
will do as a member 
of the church. 
’éĘ ŌĆ£Reads the Apostles 
Creed. 
’éĘ Grams and recites 
the ApostleŌĆÖs creed. 
Becoming a member of the 
church. 
’éĘ Baptism 
- Acts 2:38 
’éĘ Confirmation 
’éĘ’ĆĀ
The Apostles Creed 
’éĘ World wide church Gal 3:27 
’éĘ Communion Saints 
- Revelations. 7:8-10 
- Revelations 8:1 - 4 
’éĘ Reading and 
memorizing the 
Baptism and 
Confirmation prayer. 
 
 
Reciting the Apostles 
Creed. 
 ’éĘ Writes different 
church activities. 
Church activities 
’éĘ Worship 
- Acts 2:41-47 
’éĘ Service 
- Ephesians 6:19 
’éĘ Using our gifts 
- 1 Thessalonians 5:16-18 
- 2 Thessalonians 3:2 
’éĘ Listing ways of 
worship and prayer 
from experience and 
the Bible. 
’éĘ Describes different 
vocations and their 
roles in the 
community. 
’éĘ Talks about different 
vacations. 
’éĘ Writes roles of 
different vocations in 
the community. 
Vocations 
’éĘ Examples of vocations e.g. 
priesthood, teachers, doctors 
etc. 
’éĘ Recognizing individual 
abilities and qualities. 
’éĘ Role playing the 
roles of different 
vocations. 


--- PAGE 140 ---
128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
’éĘ Describes JesusŌĆÖ 
experience as a 
child and outside 
home 
’éĘ Writes simple 
sentences about 
activities Jesus got 
involved in as a 
child. 
The work Jesus did as a 
child 
’éĘ Luke 2:42 
’éĘ Luke 2:51 
’éĘ Lessons young people learn 
from Jesus as a child. 
’éĘ Children give 
examples of 
activities Jesus 
engaged in as a 
child. 
’éĘ Children discuss the 
work they do at 
home and school. 
’éĘ Bible 


--- PAGE 141 ---
129 
 
 
 
 
 
TERM III 
TOPIC 7: Witness 
 
Background to the Topic 
 
This topic will expose to the learners that Christ is the light of the world. Help the learner to understand how ChristŌĆÖs light can be seen 
in our daily life. 
 
The topic presents the concept of witness and how Christians should live as witnesses for Christ in their respective vocations/ 
occupations/professions.  The learner is to learn the roles of: 
’éĘ Returning officer. 
’éĘ Presiding officer. 
’éĘ Polling assistants. 
’éĘ Polling constables. 
The topic also presents how learners should be witnesses while performing their duties. 
 
Learning Outcome: 
The learner is able to understand and appreciate that Christians are witnesses/disciples of Christ in whatever circumstances they find 
themselves. 
 
Life skills 
’éĘ Self-awareness.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Effective communication.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Problem solving.’ĆĀ
 
Values 
’éĘ Honesty’ĆĀ
’éĘ Respect’ĆĀ
’éĘ Commitment’ĆĀ
’éĘ Patience’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 142 ---
130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains how 
Jesus is the light 
of the world. 
’éĘ Describes how 
ChristŌĆÖs light can 
be seen in us. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Writes ways in 
which Christ is 
seen as  a light in 
us and in the world. 
Christ the light 
’éĘ How Christ is the light. 
- John 8:12 - 20 
’éĘ How ChristŌĆÖs light can 
be seen in us. 
- Luke 18:35-43 
- Luke 1:10 ŌĆō 17 
- John 11:33 ŌĆō 36 
- Mark 10: 13-16 
’éĘ Singing songs about 
sharing the light of 
Christ. 
’éĘ Discussing ways in 
which Christ is seen 
as the light in us 
and in the world. 
 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Biographies/literature 
about the people 
mentioned. 
’éĘ Pictures of the people 
mentioned. 
’éĘ Describes 
different ways of 
witnessing for 
Christ. 
’éĘ Writes the meaning 
of witness and 
ways of witnessing 
for Christ 
Witnessing for Christ 
’éĘ Concept of witness. 
’éĘ Living as a witness for 
Christ. 
- Mathew 5:14-16 
’éĘ Spreading the word. 
- Mathew 28:19-20 
- Ephesians 4:11-12 
 
’éĘ Ways of witnessing for 
Christ. 
- Ephesians 4:7 
- Kivebulaya 
- Mother Tereza 
- Nelson Mandela 
- Nyerere 
- 1Timothy 3:1 ŌĆō 2 
- Mathew 5:14-16 
’éĘ Discussing ways of 
witnessing for 
Christ. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Discussing in 
groups different 
Christians in history 
who have witnessed 
for Christ. 
’éĘ Demonstrates 
the Christian 
’éĘ Talks about how 
to reflect the light 
How to reflect the light of 
Christ to other people 
’éĘ Discussing the 
values that 
’éĘ Voter Educations 
Manual 


--- PAGE 143 ---
131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
service to the of Christ to other - Values that share good 
behaviour. 
- Avoiding moral 
degeneration in 
society. 
- The role of a returning 
officer, presiding 
officer, polling 
assistant, constable, 
etc. 
promote good  
community as a people. behaviour. 
witness to   
Christ.   
’éĘ Explains how to   
form healthy   
relationships.   
 
 
 
TOPIC 8: Discipleship and its Rewards 
 
Background to the Topic 
This topic presents the idea of discipleship to the learner as well as the teaching of Jesus about discipleship. It further gives 
knowledge to the learners about the qualities and examples of discipleship. It also gives examples of famous Christians who 
emulated the discipleship as understood and taught by Jesus. 
 
This topic teaches learners about relationships, qualities of a good friend and Jesus as a good friend. It also gives some knowledge 
on the polling process as seen in the roles of election observers and election monitors. The teacher can use group discussion, 
explanation, question and answer, and role-play in teaching this topic. 
 
Learning Outcome: 
The learner is able to understand and explain the concept of discipleship and describe JesusŌĆÖ teaching about discipleship. 
 
Life skills 
’éĘ Friendship formation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Critical thinking.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 144 ---
132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Values 
’éĘ Cooperation’ĆĀ
’éĘ Love’ĆĀ
 
’éĘ Respect’ĆĀ
’éĘ Patience’ĆĀ
 
Topic competence Language Competence Content Suggested activities Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Describes 
discipleship 
The learner, 
’éĘ Tell Jesus teaching 
on Discipleship. 
Discipleship 
’éĘ Describe discipleship 
’éĘ Jesus teaching 
- Mark 1:16-20 
- Mathew 4:23-25 
’éĘ Brainstorming on 
JesusŌĆÖ teachings on 
discipleship. 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Explains JesusŌĆÖ 
teaching on 
discipleship 
’éĘ Writes some 
examples of 
discipleship 
Examples of discipleship 
’éĘ Spiritual uprightness 
’éĘ Comfort in sorrow. 
’éĘ Being humble. 
’éĘ Being pure in heart. 
’éĘ Working for peace. 
’éĘ Courage in persecution. 
- Mathew 5:1 ŌĆō 10 
- Luke 12: 29 ŌĆō 31 
- 
’éĘ Discussing what 
Jesus taught about 
discipleship. 
 
’éĘ Identifying different 
examples of 
discipleship. 
’éĘ Lists some 
famous 
Christians who 
lived a life of 
discipleship. 
’éĘ Reads the lives of 
some famous 
Christians who lived 
a life of discipleship. 
Some famous Christians who 
lived a life of discipleship 
- St. Francis of Assisi 
- St. Clare 
- St. Augustine 
 ’éĘ Profiles of 
famous 
Christians like 
St. Francis of 
Assisi 


--- PAGE 145 ---
133 
 
 
 
 
 
TOPIC 9: RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD 
 
Background to the Topic 
This topic helps the learner to explore the concept of the Trinity: the ŌĆ£three persons in oneŌĆØ. It helps the learner to explore the roles of 
each personality in the Trinity. 
The relationship between the Trinity reflects love, it is the same love that should exist and guide the relations of GodŌĆÖs creatures. This 
topic gives examples of Christians who to their best, lived and practiced love of God and love of fellow human beings. The topic 
challenges the learner to respond to that divine love by emulating the examples of some famous Christians. 
 
The suggested methods will include singing, reading the Bible and discussions. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to study and articulate the roles played by the three persons: God the FATHER, God the SON and God the 
HOLY SPIRIT. 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
’éĘ The learner: 
Describes the 
role of the three 
persons of the 
Trinity. 
 
’éĘ Identifies the 
three persons 
which make the 
Trinity 
’éĘ Explains the role 
of each person 
The learner: 
’éĘ Writes the roles of 
the three persons of 
the Trinity. 
’éĘ Writes a simple 
poem about the 
trinity 
Trinity 
’éĘ God the Father 
- 1 John 3:1 
- Luke 12:29-30 
- 1 John 4:8-10 
 
’éĘ God the Son John 15:9- 
10 
- John 8:19 
’éĘ God the Holy Spirit 
- Romans 5:5, 8:9-17 
’éĘ Concept of the Trinity 
- Mathew 3:16-17 
- Mathew 2:28:19 
- 1Peter 1: 2 
’éĘ Memorizing the Bible 
verses on the Trinity. 
’éĘ Discussion of the 
verses 
’éĘ Guided discovery on 
the roles of each 
person. 
 
’éĘ Singing a song of the 
Trinity. 
 
’éĘ Creative writing 
’éĘ Bible 


--- PAGE 146 ---
134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
’éĘ Identifies the 
two great 
commandments 
Jesus taught. 
 
’éĘ Responds to 
GodŌĆÖs love by 
obeying His 
commandments 
and loving 
others 
’éĘ Reads the Bible 
verses. 
 
’éĘ Writes the two great 
commandments. 
’éĘ Talks about 
Christians who 
showed love to 
others. 
’éĘ Reciting the two 
great 
commandments. 
Two great commandments 
’éĘ Jesus teaching John 
15:9-12 
Mathew 7:12 
Mathew 5:43-44. 
’éĘ Examples of Christians 
Who loved without 
discrimination 
’éĘ Our response 
’éĘ Studying Bible 
references and 
discovering the role 
God the Father Son 
and the Holy Spirit 
plays. 
’éĘ Memorizing the great 
commandments 
taught by Jesus. 
 
’éĘ Dramatizing ways 
they can show Gods 
love to others. 
 
 
 
TOPIC 10:  HOPE 
 
Background to the Topic 
This topic aims at equipping learners with knowledge and skills that will encourage them never to give up. It explains to the learners 
how people waited for a Saviour right from the Old Testament times. The learners will be exposed to the messages of hope in 
Psalms, Jeremiah and Isaiah. 
 
The topic of hope will also be applied in the learnersŌĆÖ daily lives. The methods of instruction will include reading the Bible, discussion, 
singing, creative writing and role playing. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to: 
’éĘ Appreciate the fact that God is the source of hope in all circumstances.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Develop skills that enable him/her to keep going on even under difficult circumstances.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 147 ---
135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Life skills 
’éĘ Coping with emotions’ĆĀ
’éĘ Decision-making’ĆĀ
 
Values 
’éĘ Faith’ĆĀ
’éĘ Hope’ĆĀ
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains Psalms 
of hope as 
reflected in the 
Bible. 
The learner, 
’éĘ Reads Luke 2:42 
’éĘ Psalms of hope. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Writes how hope in 
God can help him 
face difficulties. 
Psalms of Hope 
Psalms 31:24 
33:20, 33:22 
34:17-18, 42:5 
71:5 ŌĆō 7 
’éĘ God give strength. 
’éĘ God gives protection. 
’éĘ God listens. 
’éĘ God is with us. 
’éĘ Memorizing 
Psalms of Hope 
Discussing of the 
message in the 
Psalms. 
 
 
’éĘ Writing a prayer 
asking God to give 
him hope in 
difficulties. 
’éĘ 
’éĘ Bible 
’éĘ Explains the Old 
Testament 
teaching about 
the hope that 
God gives. 
’éĘ Tells about the hope 
that God gives. 
Old Testament teaching about 
Hope 
’éĘ Hope in trouble 
- Jeremiah 6:22-28 
- 23:5-6 
- 31:1-5 
- 31:31-34 
’éĘ Hope for Messiah 
Isaiah: 11:1-10 
’éĘ Role playing on how 
to cope with teenage 
pregnancy and other 
forms of trouble. 
’éĘ Reading and 
discussing of the 
Bible texts. 
’éĘ Bible. 
 
’éĘ PIACY 
materials. 


--- PAGE 148 ---
136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topic competence Language 
Competence 
Content Suggested activities Resources 
’éĘ Describes how 
people were 
prepared for the 
coming of the 
Messiah. 
’éĘ Tells how people 
were prepared for 
the coming of the 
Messiah. 
Coming of the Messiah 
’éĘ Zechariah vision 
Luke 1:5-25, 
 
’éĘ Preparation 
Luke 1:25 ŌĆō 38 
 
’éĘ The Messiah is born 
Luke 1:39-45 
’éĘ Wise men welcome the 
Messiah. 
Mathew: 2:1-11. 
’éĘ Memorizing the Bible 
verses. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Singing a song about 
the birth of the 
Messiah. 
’éĘ Bible. 
’éĘ Explains how 
God gives hope 
for external life. 
’éĘ Talks about how 
God gives hope 
external life. 
Christian hope 
’éĘ Hope of external life. 
1Thess 4:13-14 
1Peter 1:3-4 
’éĘ Personal response. 
’éĘ Role playing the wise 
men going to see the 
Messiah. 
 


--- PAGE 149 ---
137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B) ŌĆō Islamic Religious Education Syllabus 


--- PAGE 150 ---
138 
 
 
 
 
 
ISLAMIC RELIGIOUS EDUCATION 
Background 
This is Primary Five I slamic Religious Education Syllabus. In Primary 1 ŌĆō 3 learning is based on themes, learning outcomes and 
competences. Most of the religious related competences are covered under the literacy strands of the Thematic Curriculum. 
 
In Primary Four learning bas ed on subjects and the Religious Education Syllabus outlined the learning outcomes, content and 
language competences. Learners in Primary Five are expected to have developed sufficient basic literacy skills both in local and 
English language. The teacher c an now use only English as a medium of instruction. The teacher should take note that the concepts 
are clear to enable the learners consolidate what was learnt in earlier classes.  The instructional process will follow what was in the  
old syllabus and the teachers will be required to use the old instructional materials. 
 
Rationale 
The revised Primary Five Religious Education syllabus has been designed to consolidate all the skills acquired from P.1 to P. 4. It is 
also intended to provide the learner with kn owledge on faith, other religions, hope, relationships, judgement, fasting, leadership, good 
neighbourliness, importance of prayer among others. 
 
There have been changes made including reducing the content to keep the learning experience light and simple for the learners. 
’éĘ Language competences have been included in order to enforce literacy skills.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Subject competences and language competences have been included to replace specific objectives.  These competences focus  
on knowledge, comprehension and application.’ĆĀ
’éĘ General learning outcomes instead of general objective are also stipulated for each topic.’ĆĀ
’éĘ A background to introduce each of the topics has been provided. It further gives an overview of the whole topic and thus gives 
teacher an insight into the topic.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Content on Voter Education, sexual and Reproductive Health, life planning skills and child labour has been included. The teacher 
has been guided on how to teach it, resources for the teacher to consult have also been provided in the syllabus Matrix.’ĆĀ
 
Assessment Guidelines 
In principle continuous assessment is recommended and should be based on the summarized competences suggested in each topic. 
All assessments of learning shall be based on the learning competences given in this syllabus. Besides the Conti nuous Assessment, 
there shall be end of term and end of year assessment carried out and records kept. 


--- PAGE 151 ---
139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Methodology 
It is strongly suggested that the teacher uses those methods and activities which put the learner at the centre of the teachi ng/learning 
process. The active verbs used in expressing the learning competences are all directed to the learner. This implies that as a  result of 
teaching/learning process, the learner should exhibit these competences. 
 
The teacher of Religious Education is expected to use a variety of books of the old curriculum. This will not enrich teachers content  
but will help the teacher to prepare the correct contents of the topics. The teacher is expected to constantly help relate sc ience to real 
life situations and experiences. Not all schools in Uganda may have same learning environment. The teacher should feel free to use 
examples which provide the learner with the opportunity to acquire the same knowledge, concepts, skills, values and competences. 
 
The methods a t eacher chooses to use should be those which contribute towards the achievement of competences, learning 
outcomes and eventually lead to the achievements of aims and objectives of primary education. They should be interactive in o rder to 
make the learning process interesting. 
 
General learning outcomes 
When the learners go through this syllabus they will be able to: 
’éĘ Appreciate the values that are advanced by the Surah(s)’ĆĀ
’éĘ Express knowledge and understanding of fasting and how it links people to the Creator.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Practice and express good neighbourliness in the communities where they live.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Respect both God-made-laws and man-made-laws.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Appreciate the values of giving inform of Zakah.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 152 ---
140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TERM I 
THEME 1:  READING FROM THE QUŌĆÖRAN (CHAPTER 99) 
 
Topic 1: Surat Al-Zilzala 
 
General Background 
Surat  Al-zilzala at is the 99th chapter in the QurŌĆÖan, 
 
It shows that any deed done in life, even the most secret, will be brought to full light of day.  The Surah was intended to guide people 
to do good and abandon evil. Hence this topic will help learners to know there is life after death, and that whatever a person does, 
good or bad, is accounted for both here and in the hereafter. The learner will therefore be able to properly choose and develop value. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Recitation’ĆĀ
’éĘ Rote method’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion’ĆĀ
’éĘ Demonstration’ĆĀ
 
Life skills and Values 
- Effective communication. 
- Creative thinking. 
- Decision- making. 
 
Learning Outcome 
’éĘ The learner is able to understand and appreciate the content of the Surah, adopt and practice values advanced by the Surah and 
demonstrate life skills for maintaining peace in society.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 153 ---
141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Recites Surat 
AL-Zilzala. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, writes, 
pronounces and 
uses the following 
words related to the 
topic correctly: 
- Surah 
- Al-zilzala 
- Revealed 
’éĘ Recitation of Surah 
Al-zilzala Chapter 99. 
 
’éĘ Invite a Mullah or school 
Sheik to assist recite the 
Surah correctly. 
’éĘ Supervise their 
individual recitation and 
ensure memorization is 
done correctly. 
’éĘ Memorization of the 
Surah. 
 
’éĘ QurŌĆÖan. 
’éĘ Resource person. 
’éĘ Interprets the 
meaning of 
the Surah. 
’éĘ Meaning of the Surah. ’éĘ Guide learners to tell the 
meaning of the Surah. 
’éĘ Markers . 
’éĘ Chart displaying 
the meaning of 
the Surah. 
’éĘ Relates the 
message in 
the Surah to 
his/her daily 
life. 
’éĘ Relating the message of the 
Surah to real life. 
’éĘ Life after death. 
’éĘ Deed done in life, even the 
most secrete will be brought to 
the full light of day. 
’éĘ Do good and abandon evil. 
’éĘ What mankind does, good or 
bad, shall be accounted for. 
’éĘ Proper choice and 
development of values e.g. 
honesty, respect for self and 
others, justice, peacefulness, 
cleanliness, etc. 
’éĘ Use brainstorming and 
guided discussion to get 
the message and 
lessons from the Surah. 
’éĘ Discuss factors that 
influence values e.g. 
family, peers, 
environment and how 
these values prepare an 
individual for the Day of 
Judgment. 
’éĘ Charts showing 
examples of 
values in our 
society. 
’éĘ QurŌĆÖan. 


--- PAGE 154 ---
142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Reciting Surat Al-Zilzala.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining the meaning of the Surah.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Relating the Surah to daily life.’ĆĀ
 
THEME 2: HADITH: TRADITIONS OF THE PROPHET (PBUH) 
 
Topic 2: Settlement of Debts 
 
General Background 
A debt is something that needs to be paid off. It could be physical or not. It is recommended by Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) that 
when you are in debt, try to repay it in order to keep good relationship with people. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Brainstorming.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Poetry.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Question and answers.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Interpersonal relationships.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Friendship formation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Decision-making.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
’éĘ The learner is able to read Prophet Literature and appreciate the message therein; practices life skills and demonstrates values for 
settling debts.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 155 ---
143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
’éĘ Narrates two 
Hadiths 
concerning 
settlement of 
debts. 
 
 
’éĘ Interprets the 
meaning of the 
Hadith 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, spells, writes, 
pronounces and uses 
the following words 
related to the topic 
correctly: 
- Debts. 
- Guarantee. 
- Promise. 
- Perform. 
- Borrow. 
- Hypocrite. 
- Embezzlement. 
- Entrusted. 
 
’éĘ Hadith concerning settlement of 
debts. 
- The prophet said: ŌĆ£if you will give me 
a guarantee on six points, I will 
guarantee paradise for you: when you 
speak, tell the truth; when you 
promise, perform; when you borrow, 
fulfill the promise ŌĆ”.ŌĆØ 
 
’éĘ Hadith concerning settlement of 
debts. 
The Prophet said ŌĆ£ The signs of a 
hypocrite are three: when she/he talks 
she/he lies, when he/she is entrusted 
he/she promises she/he does not fulfillŌĆØ 
’éĘ In groups allow 
learners to share 
lessons learnt from 
the Hadith. 
 
Interprets the two 
prophetic traditions. 
’éĘ Interpretation of the meaning of the 
Hadiths. 
’éĘ Interpret to the learner 
the meaning of the 
Hadith. 
’éĘ Guide the learner to 
recite a poem on 
keeping good 
relationships. 
’éĘ Chart. 
’éĘ Markers. 
’éĘ Learners 
textbook. 
Discusses the 
importance of Hadith. 
’éĘ The importance of the Hadith. ’éĘ Telling the importance 
of the Hadith. 
Relates the two 
Hadiths to her/his 
daily life 
’éĘ Relating the two Hadiths to his/her 
daily life 
’éĘ Use brainstorming 
and guided discussion 
 


--- PAGE 156 ---
144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
  ’éĘ Things that can build or destroy 
relationships e.g. sharing, breaking a 
promise, etc. 
to help learners relate 
the message from 
Hadith to daily life. 
 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Narrating two prophetic traditions regarding settlement of debts.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Interpreting the meaning of the given Hadith.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining the importance of the Hadith.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Mentioning lessons learnt from the Hadith.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Role playing consequences of not settling debts.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Role playing consequences that can build or destroy relationship.’ĆĀ
 
THEME 3: TAWHID (FAITH) 
 
Topic 3: Resurrection and Judgment 
 
General Background 
Belief in the Day of Judgment is the fifth Pillar of Iman. It is very important because such a belief controls the actions of a believer. It 
involves the belief in the Day of Judgment and everything related to that day like death, such as after death and before resurrection. 
 
Resurrection is when the dead will come back to life. After the second blowing of the trumpet, people will be resurrected. They will be 
gathered in one place where judgment will take place. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Guided discovery.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Dramatization.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Question and answer.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 157 ---
145 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Decision making.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Creative thinking.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcome 
’éĘ The learner will know and tell the difference between resurrection and judgement, appreciate the events of resurrection and those 
that will lead to the Day of Judgement as well as demonstrate skills for living a harmonious life leading to a better abord  in the 
here after.’ĆĀ
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Recognizes and 
tells the 
relationship 
between 
resurrection and 
judgement. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, 
pronounces, 
writes, spells and 
uses the following 
words related to 
the topic correctly; 
- Resurrection 
- Judgment 
- Creativeness 
- Accountability 
- Gathering 
Resurrection 
- Blowing the trumpet. 
- Resurrection. 
- Gathering of all people. 
- Receiving books of records. 
- Accountability. 
’éĘ Review the previous topic - 
Surat Al-Zilzala. 
’éĘ Guide learners in a 
discussion in the events of 
the day of resurrection. 
’éĘ Group learners to dramatize 
the resurrection day. 
 
’éĘ Learners. 
textbook. 
’éĘ Trumpet. 
’éĘ Files. 
’éĘ Outlines the 
significance of 
resurrection and 
judgement 
’éĘ Significance of resurrection and 
judgment. 
’éĘ Hope in an individual. 
’éĘ Live well in society. 
’éĘ An individual lives consciously. 
’éĘ Carefully to choose what we do. 
’éĘ Individually task learners to 
outline the significance of 
the day of judgement. 
 


--- PAGE 158 ---
146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Describing the events of resurrection and judgment.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining the significance of resurrection and day of  judgment.’ĆĀ
 
THEME 4: FIQH (PRACTICE) 
 
Topic 4: Fasting 
General Background 
 
Fasting generally is ŌĆ£to abstain from doing certain things.ŌĆØ In Islam, it refers to abstaining from eating, drinking and sexual intercourse 
from dawn until sunset with the intention of fulfilling AllahŌĆÖs commands. Knowledge about this topic will help learners develop 
measures for choosing values rightly and to practice patience and endurance life skills. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Discussions.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Question and answer’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Appreciation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Standing for oneŌĆÖs values and beliefs.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Interpersonal relations.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
The Learner is able to know and understand the importance of fasting, appreciates the need for perfecting it and practices moral 
values linking them to his/her creator. 


--- PAGE 159 ---
147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Defines fasting. 
The learner: 
Writes, spells, reads, 
pronounces and uses the 
following words related to 
the topic correctly: 
- Fasting 
- Abstinence 
- Ramadhan 
- Dawn 
- Subset 
- Exempted. 
’éĘ Definition of fasting 
Abstaining from eating, 
drinking and sexual 
intercourse from dawn 
up to sunset, during the 
months of Ramadhan. 
’éĘ Guide learners to 
discuss the definition of 
fasting. 
’éĘ Summarize learnerŌĆÖs 
responses. 
 
’éĘ LearnersŌĆÖ 
textbooks. 
’éĘ Explains reasons 
for fasting. 
’éĘ Reasons for fasting 
- To thank God. 
- Repenting. 
- It is a pillar of Islam. 
- To get rewards. 
’éĘ Brainstorm about the 
importance of fasting. 
’éĘ LearnersŌĆÖ text 
books. 
’éĘ Describes people 
who should fast 
and those who care 
exempted. 
’éĘ People who should fast 
- Mature Muslims. 
- Sane Muslims. 
’éĘ People exempted from 
fasting 
- Young children. 
- Menstruating women. 
- Breast feeding mothers. 
- Sick people. 
- The insane. 
- Travelers. 
- Very old people. 
’éĘ Help learners to mention 
people who should fast. 
’éĘ Task them further to 
describe those 
exempted from fasting. 
 


--- PAGE 160 ---
148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
’éĘ Explains things 
that spoil fasting. 
 ’éĘ Things that spoil fasting 
- Menstruation. 
- Eating and drinking. 
- Playing sex during the 
day. 
- Vomiting. 
’éĘ Guide learners to 
discuss things that spoil 
fasting. 
’éĘ LearnersŌĆÖ 
textbooks. 
 
Suggested competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Defines fasting.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Outlining the importance of fasting.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Describing people exempted from fasting.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining things that spoil fasting.’ĆĀ
 
THEME 5: HISTORY OF ISLAM 
 
Topic 5:     Prophet Muhammad at Madina (PBUH) 
 
General Background 
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) migrated from Mecca to Madina (Hejira) in the year 622A.D. It was an order from God due to increased 
persecution in Mecca. Secondly, Prophet Muhammad was invited by the people of Madina to help them resolve confli cts that existed 
there, and to spread Islam in Madina. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Discussions.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Brainstorming.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Story telling.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Values 
’éĘ Appreciation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Standing for oneŌĆÖs values and beliefs.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 161 ---
149 
 
 
 
’éĘ Interpersonal relations.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 162 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The learner is able to understand and appreciate the behaviours of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) at Madina and is able to demonstrate 
those behaviours into day to day life. 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Describes Prophet 
MuhammadŌĆÖs 
leadership style in 
Madina (PBUH) 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, writes, spells, 
pronounces and uses 
the following words 
related to the topic, 
- Tribal wars. 
- Constitutional Laws. 
- Leadership roles. 
’éĘ Prophet, Muhammad 
(PBUH) at Madina. 
 
’éĘ His life as a leader 
- Unified the people 
under one leadership. 
- Stopped tribal wars in 
Madina. 
- Introduced the Madina 
Constitution. 
 
 
’éĘ Guide learners to identify 
some problems that were 
in Madina before 
migration. 
- No unifying leader. 
- Tribal wars. 
- No laws governing the city 
of Madina, etc. 
’éĘ Guide learners to compare 
the Constitution of Uganda 
with the QurŌĆÖan. (Muslim 
constitution). 
’éĘ Help learners to identify 
the importance of a 
constitution. 
 
 
Holy QuŌĆÖran 
Constitution 
of Uganda. 


--- PAGE 163 ---
150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Mention the name of 
the first Mosque 
built in the history of 
Islam 
 
’éĘ Explain how Prophet 
Muhammad (PBUH) 
managed to spread 
the new religion of 
Islam 
’éĘ Write and read simple 
story of prophet 
MuhammadŌĆÖs work in 
Madina 
 
’éĘ Use simple sentences to 
retell activities of prophet 
Muhammad at Madina 
’éĘ Write short sentences 
using with empathies of 
the following words. 
- Preaching 
- Envoy 
’éĘ Prophet MuhammadŌĆÖs 
life as a massager in 
Madina 
- Built a Mosque. 
- Taught and preached 
the religion of ALLAH. 
- Sent his companions 
outside Madina. 
- He sent envoys to 
various kings and tribal 
leaders asking them to 
join the religion of 
Islam. 
- Guide learners to tell 
various activities of 
Prophet Muhammad at 
Madina. 
 
 
- Draw the Mosque of 
Madina. 
- Ask learners to write a 
story about ProphetŌĆÖs 
MuhammadŌĆÖs mission in 
Madina. 
 
’éĘ Identifies battles in 
which Prophet 
Muhammad (PBUH) 
participated. 
’éĘ Read, write and spell 
the following new words 
correctly: 
- Battle. 
- Badr. 
- Uhud. 
- Khanndaq. 
’éĘ Write short sentences 
showing how they can 
lead an activity. 
’éĘ Share experiences 
where they participate in 
group activities. 
’éĘ Prophet Muhammad 
as a commander 
- The battle of Badr. 
- The battle of Uhud. 
- The battle of Khandaq. 
- Guide learners to mention 
the battles Prophet 
Muhammad participated 
in. 
- Help learners to discuss 
lessons they learn from 
Prophet Muhammad. 
 
- LearnersŌĆÖ 
Text book 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Explaining Prophet MuhammadŌĆÖs leadership style in 
Madina.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Describing how Prophet Muhammad spread the new 
religion of Islam.’ĆĀ
 
’éĘ Identifying various wars Prophet Muhammad participated in.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Defining a constitution.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining the importance of a constitution.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 164 ---
151 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Comparing the Ugandan constitution with the QurŌĆÖan (Muslim Constitution).’ĆĀ
TERM II 
THEME 1:  READING FROM THE QURŌĆÖAN 
 
Topic: Surat Al-Kauthar (Chapter 108) 
 
General Background 
This Surah was intended to comfort Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). He was going through very hard times as his own people had 
turned against him and were resisting and opposing his mission. His companions also saw no chance of success with him. Besides, 
the Surah foretold the destruction of his enemies. Thus, the topic is important to the learners because it gives hope for people in 
problems, as it equips them with life skills for patience, perseverance and keeping on work however hard the circumstances. The 
learner, therefore is expected to: 
(i) Protect truthfulness and stick on it. 
(ii) Have hope in the future. 
(iii) Depend on Allah and elders in case of a problem. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Recitation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Rote method.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Demonstration.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Role play.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Creative thinking.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Patience.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Decision-making.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Perseverance.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to know and appreciate the life that was lived by the Prophet (PBUH) and demonstrate skills for coping with 
situations. 


--- PAGE 165 ---
152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
’éĘ Surat Al- Kauthar 
(Chapter) 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, writes spells 
pronounces and uses 
the following words 
related to the topic: 
- Kauthar. 
- Slaughter. 
- Barren. 
- Belittle. 
’éĘ Recitation of Surat 
Al-Kauthar 
(Chapter 108). 
’éĘ Memorization of the 
above given Surah. 
’éĘ - Recite the Surah in its original 
form. 
’éĘ Let learners listen as you make 
the recitation atleast thrice. 
’éĘ Recite the Surah and let 
learners repeat after you. 
’éĘ Divide learners into different 
groups. 
’éĘ Make a recitation of the Surah 
and let one of the groups recite 
after you while others listen. 
’éĘ Give each group the same 
opportunity. 
 


--- PAGE 166 ---
153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Interprets the 
meaning of the 
Surah. 
 
’éĘ Relates the message 
in the Surah to the 
learnerŌĆÖs actual life. 
 ’éĘ Meaning of the 
Surah 
- Verse 1: Surely, we 
have given you a 
lot of good things 
so pray to your God 
and sacrifice to 
him. 
- Verse 3: He who 
hates you is the 
one cut off. 
 
 
 
- The message in the 
Surah. 
’éĘ Tell learners the English 
interpretation of the Surah. 
’éĘ Help learners to discover how 
the meaning of the Surah 
relates to their actual life. 
 
’éĘ Guide learners to make a 
drama on scenes depicting the 
need for turning to Allah for 
prayer whenever in problems. 
 
’éĘ Guide learners to discuss 
issues in the Surah that relate 
to their daily life. 
’éĘ Help learners to tell their 
experiences about how they 
solve their problems. 
 
 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
 
’éĘ Reciting the Surah.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Giving the meaning of verses in the Surah.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Telling lessons learnt from the Surah.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Dramatizing how turning to Allah in prayer can solve peopleŌĆÖs problems.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 167 ---
154 
 
 
 
 
 
THEME 2:  HADITH:  TRADITIONS OF THE PROPHET (PBUH) 
 
Topic 2: Good Neighbourliness 
 
General Background 
Good neighbourliness in one of the values any person is asked to promote. It is intended to knit a strong, coherent and caring society. 
In this society, everybody is expected to enjoy care and protection which are a result of the good relations brought about. One of the 
social misdeeds a Muslim can ever commit it to be unkind to a neighbour.  Thus, this topic will help the learner to develop life skills 
and values for living harmoniously in society. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Group discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Demonstration.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Story telling.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Values 
’éĘ Effective communication.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Problem-solving.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Negotiation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Empathy.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Caring.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
The learner is able to appreciate the need for good neighbourliness, show Islamic social values and demonstrate love and care for 
others in the community. 


--- PAGE 168 ---
155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language Competences Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Narrates two 
prophetic traditions 
concerning good 
neighbourliness. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, spells, 
pronounces, writes and 
uses the following 
words related to the 
topic correctly. 
- Neighbour 
- Safe. 
- Misdeeds. 
- Believer. 
- Obligations. 
’éĘ Hadith concerning 
good neighbourliness 
- The Prophet said ŌĆ£A 
man whose 
neighbour is not safe 
from his misdeeds is 
not a believer in 
IslamŌĆØ 
- The Prophet (PBUH) 
said: Let the believer 
in Allah and the Day 
of judgement honour 
his neighbour 
(Muslim and Bukhar). 
 
’éĘ Lady Aisha (RA) said the 
Prophet is Allah said: 
Jibreal advised me so 
repeatedly, to care for 
my neighbour that I 
thought my neighbour is 
my inheritor (Bukhar and 
Muslim). 
’éĘ Help learners to read 
and write the Hadith 
correctly. 
 
’éĘ Supervise them as 
they are writing. 
 
’éĘ Let the learners define 
and write the 
definition of a 
neighbour. 
’éĘ Textbooks. 
’éĘ Chart which 
has the 
Hadiths. 


--- PAGE 169 ---
156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Interprets the 
Prophetic traditions. 
 ’éĘ The meaning of the 
prophetic traditions. 
’éĘ Even if one does all 
other religious 
obligations but does not 
treat his/her neigbours 
well, he/she may go to 
hell. 
’éĘ Explain the prophetic 
traditions. 
’éĘ Help them to identify 
the meaning and 
allow them to write it. 
 
’éĘ Relates the 
information in the 
Hadith to daily life 
experience. 
 ’éĘ How information in the 
Hadith relates to daily 
life. 
’éĘ Islam encourages 
sustenance of good 
relations through the 
following. 
- Visiting neighbours 
especially on occasions 
of death, sickness, 
births, weddings, etc. 
- Avoiding to do any ill to 
a neighbour. 
- Talking well of the 
neighbours. 
- Being generous. 
- Extending help. 
- In groups, help 
learners to explain 
why a neighbour 
should be treated 
well. 
- Guide them to 
dramatize a good and 
a bad neighbour. 
- Ask them to write 
what they learn from 
the drama. 
 
’éĘ Charts. 
’éĘ Textbooks 
. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Giving two traditions on good neighbourliness.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining the meaning of the traditions.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Dramatizing good neighbourliness.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Outlining lessons learnt from the play.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 170 ---
157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THEME 3:  TAWHID (FAITH) 
 
Topic 3: Paradise and Hell 
 
General Background 
Description of paradise and hell are important for any person to adhere to commandments of Allah. Temporarily, life of this world is a 
great temptation to man and this may lead people to ruining their lives as well as the world. Knowledge about existence of paradise 
and hell is crucial to the learner for it will model oneŌĆÖs life and hence guarantee them safety and harmonious living in their societies. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Picture description.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Demonstration.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Appreciation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Honesty.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Trust worthiness.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Co-operation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Obedience.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner develops knowledge about the existence of Allah, appreciates the importance of life skills for succeeding both in life and 
in the hereafter. 


--- PAGE 171 ---
158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
Defines paradise 
and hell. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, spells, 
pronounces, rites 
and uses the 
following words 
related to the topic 
- Paradise. 
- Hell. 
- Hot liquids. 
- Good doers. 
- Bad doers. 
- Jannah. 
- Allah/God. 
’éĘ Definition of paradise 
and hell 
- Paradise (Jannah) is 
a house of blessing 
for those who do 
good work and 
believe in God 
(Allah) and do what 
God commands 
them to do. 
’éĘ Help learners to define 
paradise and hell. 
’éĘ Allow them to write 
down points. 
’éĘ LearnersŌĆÖ 
textbook 
’éĘ Charts 
’éĘ Interprets the 
Prophetic 
traditions. 
’éĘ The meaning of the 
prophetic traditions: 
- Even if one does all 
other religious 
obligations but does 
not treat his/her 
neighbours well, 
he/she may go to 
hell. 
’éĘ Explain the prophetic 
traditions. 
’éĘ Help them to identify 
the meaning and allow 
them to write it. 
’éĘ 


--- PAGE 172 ---
159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes 
paradise and 
hell. 
 ’éĘ Description of paradise 
and Hell. 
- Paradise has got 
everything good that 
one may think of e.g. 
good rivers, good 
environment, neighbour 
neither hot nor cold, 
good fruits, etc. 
- Hell has got burning fire 
which does not stop, 
hot liquids with a bad 
smell, etc. 
’éĘ In groups, let the 
learners describe 
paradise and hell. 
’éĘ Demonstrate paradise 
and hell. 
’éĘ Charts 
’éĘ QuŌĆÖran 
’éĘ Textbooks 
 
Suggested competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Defining hell and paradise.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussing things that will be found in paradise and in hell.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Describing the kind of people who will go to paradise and to hell.’ĆĀ
 
THEME 4:  FIQH (PRACTICE) 
 
Topic 4: Tarawiih and Idd Prayers 
General Background 
Tarawiih and Idd are optional prayers of great significance in the life of an individual. Besides getting rewards for performing them, 
people meet, socialize, acquire new friends and solve their problems as a team. They signify unity of the faithful. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Demonstration.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Role playing method.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 173 ---
160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Life Skills and Values 
’éĘ Effective communication.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Interpersonal relationships’ĆĀ
’éĘ Friendship formation.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to perform Tarawiih and Idd prayers perfectly and demonstrate life skills for ensuring peace and unity in society. 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language Competences Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Defines 
Tarawiih and 
Idd prayers. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, spells, 
pronounces, writes and 
correctly uses the 
following words related 
to the topic: 
- Sunnah. 
- Prayers. 
- Tarawiih. 
- Idd. 
- Celebration. 
- Praise. 
- Unity. 
- Repentance. 
- Performance. 
- Dhul Hijja. 
- Congregation. 
’éĘ Definitions 
- Tarawiih prayers are 
specific prayers offered 
during the month of 
Ramadhan. 
- It is Sunnah for both men 
and women. They are 
offered after the Isha 
prayer. 
- Muslims celebrate two Idd- 
days: el-Fitr which marks 
the end of the month of 
Ramadhan and Idd Adhuha 
celebrated in the month of 
Dhul hijja when Muslims 
are performing Hijja. 
’éĘ Help learners to 
differentiate between the 
two Idds by defining them 
and Tarawiih. 
’éĘ By show of hands, ask 
them if they have ever 
performed any of the 
above prayers. 
’éĘ Holy QurŌĆÖan. 
’éĘ Newspapers 
’éĘ Textbooks. 


--- PAGE 174 ---
161 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes the 
importance of 
Tarawiih and 
Idd prayers. 
 ’éĘ Importance of Tarawiih 
and Idd prayers: 
- Brings about unity among 
Muslims. 
- Get rewards. 
- Repentance. 
- Supplication. 
- Praise. 
- Celebration. 
’éĘ In groups, let learners 
demonstrate how Idd is 
performed. 
’éĘ Another group 
demonstrates Tarawiih 
prayers with the guidance 
of the teacher. 
’éĘ Summarise their 
demonstrations. 
’éĘ Jesus (covering 
cloth) Hijab, 
Kanzu. 
’éĘ Mats. 
’éĘ Caps. 
’éĘ Stick. 
’éĘ Describes Idd 
and Tarawiih 
prayers. 
 ’éĘ Description of Idd and 
Tarawiih prayers. 
- Both performed in a 
congregation (group) and 
led by Iman. 
- Tarawiih is offered in even 
rakŌĆÖah and every after two 
rakŌĆÖahs, Tahiyat is said and 
salam. 
- Idd prayer has two rakŌĆÖahs 
and we begin with praying 
and end with Khutuba 
(sermon). 
- Idd-el-fitri the sermon 
reflects the month of 
Ramadhan. 
- Idd Adhuha the sermon 
reflects Prophet Ibrahim 
and his son Ismail. 
  
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Defining Idd and Tarawiih prayers.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Outlining the importance of the above prayers.’ĆĀ
 
’éĘ Describing how the two prayers are performed.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 175 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THEME 5:  HISTORY OF ISLAM 
 
Topic 5: Last Days of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) 
General Background 
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) lived for 63 years all of which were full of lessons for us to learn. His life ended shortly after he had 
conquered the city of Mecca, a place he was rejected and later on chased from. One of the major and historical events thereof was 
the farewell pilgrimage. Hence, this topic gives an insight on this pilgrimage and some of the clauses of the sermon he delivered 
during that event. 
 
The topic is important to the learner because it provides a sense of direction, more so, as provided for in clauses of the last Prophetic 
sermon. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Story telling.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Creative thinking.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Critical thinking.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Values 
’éĘ Appreciation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Love.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Confidence.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Self -esteem.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Respect for others.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to appreciate and demonstrate the message got from the content of the last message of Prophet Muhammad 
(PBUH). 


--- PAGE 176 ---
163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested 
Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Describes the 
farewell pilgrimage. 
- The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, spells, 
pronounces, writes and 
correctly uses the 
following words related 
to the topic: 
- Farewell. 
- Pilgrimage. 
- Sickness. 
- Burial. 
- Conflict resolution. 
- Democracy. 
- Citizen. 
’éĘ Sermon prophet last 
speech and guide 
learner to note down 
points. 
’éĘ Outline the content of 
the ProphetŌĆÖs last 
speech. 
’éĘ Give the lessons 
learnt from the last 
message. 
’éĘ Give the roles and 
responsibilities in 
Uganda. 
 


--- PAGE 177 ---
164 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes the 
sickness and death 
of the prophet. 
 ’éĘ Lessons learnt from 
Prophet MuhammadŌĆÖs 
life. 
- Conflict resolution. 
- Establishment of a 
democratic Islamic state. 
- Need for democracy. 
- As a leader 
- Role of citizens in 
democracy. 
- Purposes of elections. 
- Types of elections. 
- Trustworthy. 
- Kindness. 
- Patience, etc. 
’éĘ Let learners use their 
experience to explain 
the sickness, death 
and burial of the 
Prophet. 
’éĘ Guide learners to 
demonstrate how 
one can resolve a 
conflict without 
fighting. 
’éĘ Let learners 
demonstrate the 
quality of being 
trustworthy and 
patient. 
’éĘ Summarize their 
demonstrations. 
’éĘ Textbooks 
’éĘ Markers. 
’éĘ Constitution of 
Uganda. 
’éĘ A chart 
showing the 
blind, the aged 
and the lame 
being helped to 
vote. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Outlining the content of the ProphetŌĆÖs last speech.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining the lessons learnt from the speech.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Describing the sickness and death of Prophet Muhammad.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Outlining the lessons learnt from Prophet MuhammadŌĆÖs life.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 178 ---
165 
 
 
 
 
 
THEME 1:  READING FROM THE QURŌĆÖAN 
 
Topic 1: Surah Al-Alaq (Chapter 96) 
General Background 
This topic introduces chapter 96 of the Holy QurŌĆÖan. This Chapter talks about the first revelation that Allah revealed to Prophet 
Muhammad (PBUH). It explains the importance of seeking for knowledge as it talks about the stages of creation of man. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Recitation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Rote method.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Demonstration.’ĆĀ
 
Life skills and values 
’éĘ Appreciation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Problem-solving.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Perseverance.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Confidence.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to appreciate the message contained in the Surah, adopts and practices values advanced therein and 
demonstrates life skills for living a humble but successful life. 


--- PAGE 179 ---
166 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language Competences Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Recites of the 
Surah. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, pronounces and 
writes vocabularies 
from the Surah 
- Al-Alaq. 
- Proclaim. 
- Cherisher. 
- Creator. 
- Bountiful. 
’éĘ Surah Al-Alag  verses 1 
- 8 
Meaning of the Surah: 
 
- Read in the name of 
your lord. He who 
created, 
- He created man from a 
clot of blood. 
- Read and your Lord is 
most Beautiful. 
- He taught (the use of 
pens) 
- He taught man what he 
did not know surely, man 
transgresses (the 
boundaries of Allah) 
- He looks upon him self 
as self sufficient. 
- Surely, to your lord you 
are yet to return. 
Interpreting the 
meaning of the Surah. 
Writes the 
interpretation of the 
Surah 
’éĘ Learner 
textbook 
’éĘ The QurŌĆÖan 
’éĘ Explain lessons 
learnt from the 
Surah. 
’éĘ Mentions lessons leant 
from the Surah. 
’éĘ Lessons learnt from the 
Surah. 
  
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Reciting the Surah Al-Alaq.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining the meaning of the Surah Alaq.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Reading new vocabularies from the Surah.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 180 ---
167 
 
 
 
 
 
THEME 2:  HADITH (TRADITIONS OF THE PROPHET) PBUH 
 
Topic 2: Tarawiih and Idd Prayer 
General Background: 
 
This topic presents two important kinds of prayers i.e. Tarawiih and Idd prayers. The topic gives a clear view of what Prophet 
Muhammad (PBUH) said about the two prayers and encourages learners to carry on with the message contained in the Hadiths. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Demonstration.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Brainstorming.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Question and answer.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Indicators 
’éĘ Creativity.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Problem-solving.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Relationship with others.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Sharing.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to appreciate the ProphetŌĆÖs traditions and practices the message contained therein, adopt values and demonstrate 
skills for promoting unity and build a God-fearing society. 


--- PAGE 181 ---
168 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language Competences Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Narrates a 
prophetic tradition 
concerning 
Tarawiid prayers. 
 
’éĘ Narrates a 
prophetic tradition 
concerning Idd 
prayers. 
The learner: 
Pronounces, spells, 
writes, reads and correctly 
uses the following words 
related to the topic: 
- Offer. 
- Optional. 
- Previous. 
- Night prayer. 
’éĘ Two prophetic traditions 
concerning Tarawiid and 
Idd prayer. 
 
Hadith I 
 
The prophet said: 
Whoever offers optional 
prayers (e.g. Tarawiih 
prayers) throughout each 
night of Ramadhan believing 
in Allah will have his 
previous sins forgiven. 
 
Hadith 2 
’éĘ Lady Aisha reported: 
The night prayer of each 
prophet used to be 13 
(thirteen) rakŌĆÖat. 
’éĘ Narrate one prophetic 
traditions concerning 
Tarawiih. Prayers. 
’éĘ Talk about their 
experiences related to 
Tarawiih prayer. 
’éĘ Tell the message 
derived from the Hadith. 
’éĘ Display a chart of people 
performing prayer. 
’éĘ Narrate one prophetic 
tradition concerning Idd 
prayers. 
’éĘ Discuss with learners 
about their experiences 
about Idd prayers. 
’éĘ Brainstorm with learners 
the message contained 
in the Hadith. 
’éĘ Display a chart with 
people after Idd prayer 
and are in a jovial mood. 
’éĘ LearnersŌĆÖ 
textbook 
’éĘ Charts. 


--- PAGE 182 ---
169 
 
 
 
 
 
THEME 3:  TAWHIID (FAITH) 
 
Topic 3: Sin 
General Background 
The concept of sin is central in the teaching of Islam. It refers to an individualŌĆÖs rejection of any of AllahŌĆÖs. Recognition of this concept 
helps an individual to repent and therefore turn into a good, faithful person whereas denial of existence commandments of sin and 
how it comes about leads to doom. 
 
This topic will help learners to identify the categories of sin and its consequences. Learners, therefore, will be able to adopt values 
that will help them to avoid sinning. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Demonstration.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Picture description.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Values 
’éĘ Problem-solving.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Appreciation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Trustworthy.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Patience.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Respect.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Self -esteem.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to know, appreciate and respect both God made laws and man-made laws. 


--- PAGE 183 ---
170 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language Competences Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Defines sin. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Reads, spells, writes, 
pronounces and uses 
the following words 
related to the topic 
correctly. 
- Sin. 
- Alcohol. 
- Smoking. 
- Cheating. 
- Corruption. 
- Man slaughter, etc. 
 
’éĘ Writes simple 
statements describing 
sinful situations. 
’éĘ Tells ways of 
overcoming sinful 
situations. 
’éĘ Writes short stories 
about sinful situations. 
’éĘ Definition of sin. 
- To perform an act which was 
forbidden by Allah. 
 
’éĘ Examples of sin 
- Alcohol. 
- Smoking. 
- Robbery, stealing, cheating 
- Corruption. 
- Man slaughter 
- Backbiting, etc. 
- Election 
malpractices/offence. 
- Homosexuality. 
- Masturbation. 
’éĘ Guide learners into a 
discussion on why 
sinning is bad. 
’éĘ Explain how various 
punishments for sin 
are administered. 
’éĘ Identify various 
punishments for 
different sins. 
’éĘ Draw various 
situations of 
punishments. 
’éĘ Demonstrate some 
punishment. for 
sinning. 
’éĘ LearnerŌĆÖs 
textbook. 
’éĘ Textbooks 
’éĘ Newspapers. 
’éĘ Charts showing 
punishments. 


--- PAGE 184 ---
171 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Describes why 
sinning is bad. 
’éĘ Writes short stories 
about sinning. 
’éĘ Tells various 
punishments for 
sinning. 
 
’éĘ Writes short stories 
about various 
punishments. 
’éĘ Write sinful situations. 
’éĘ Why is sinning bad? 
- Because it was forbidden by 
God (ALLAH). 
- Hurt other people in the 
society. 
 
’éĘ Various punishments for 
sinning 
- Hell. 
- Prison. 
- Canning. 
- Chopping off the hand. 
- Stoning to death, etc. 
  
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Describing the meaning of sinning.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Identifying various sin situations.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining various punishments for sinning.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining ways how they can avoid involvement in sinful situations.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Describing ways of avoiding corruption in society.’ĆĀ
 
 
THEME 4:  FIQH (PRACTICE) 
 
Topic 4: Zakat 
General Background 
 
Zakat is an Arabic word meaning to increase, to purify or to bless. It is the Fourth Pillar of Islam. It is a special portion a rich Muslim 
pays from his/her property for distribution to specific categories of people at specific times. 
Knowledge about this topic will help learners to develop life skills for proper socialization and hence grow up as good citizens in their 
societies. 


--- PAGE 185 ---
172 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Story telling.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Demonstration.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Values 
 
’éĘ Empathy’ĆĀ
’éĘ Feel for others.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Appreciation’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to know and understand the importance of Zakah and show a will to pay Zakah as he/she grows up. 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Defines Zakat. 
The learner: 
’éĘ Pronounces, spells, 
writes, reads and 
uses words as given 
in the topic e.g. 
Zakah, Nasab, 
mechadise etc. 
’éĘ Definition of Zakah 
- Is a portion a rich Muslim pays 
from his or her property for 
distribution to specific people 
at specific times. 
’éĘ Describe how Zakah 
is performed. 
’éĘ LearnerŌĆÖs 
textbook. 


--- PAGE 186 ---
173 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ’éĘ Explains in simple 
words the meaning of 
Zakah. 
’éĘ Importance of Zakat: 
- Purifies the person from 
selfishness. 
- Zakah purifies the wealth and 
blessing to the payer. 
- Zakah payer gets rewards 
from Allah. 
- Paying Zakah protects a 
person from AllahŌĆÖs 
punishment. 
’éĘ Describe how Zakah 
is performed. 
’éĘ Explain what Zakah 
is. 
’éĘ Identify the 
importance of paying 
Zakah. 
’éĘ Demonstrate how 
Zakah is performed. 
’éĘ Learners 
textbook. 
’éĘ Identifies items on 
which Zakah is 
paid. 
’éĘ Tells names of items 
on which Zakah is 
paid. 
’éĘ Reads vocabularies 
related to the topic. 
- Merchandise. 
- Animals. 
- Minerals. 
- Gold. 
- Silver. 
’éĘ Items on which Zakah is paid: 
- Crops. 
- Merchandise. 
- Animals (domestic). 
- Fruits. 
- Minerals. 
- Gold and silver, etc. 
’éĘ Drawing different 
items on which Zakat 
is paid. 
’éĘ Mentioning items on 
which Zakah is paid. 
’éĘ Describing items on 
which Zakah is paid. 
’éĘ Learners 
textbook. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Describing items on which Zakah is paid.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Identifying items on which Zakah is paid.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Explaining the importance of paying Zakah.’ĆĀ


--- PAGE 187 ---
174 
 
 
 
 
 
THEME 5:  HISTORY OF ISLAM 
 
Topic 5: Miracles of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) 
General Background: 
As a prophet, Muhammad (PBUH) performed various miracles. These were intended to prove his prophecy. The greatest miracle the 
Prophet performed was the ŌĆ£QurŌĆÖanŌĆØ; he brought it in existence while he was illiterate. 
 
The topic, therefore, explores miracles that were performed by Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). This will help learners to appreciate the 
teachings of Islam given the nature of the miracles performed. 
 
Methodology 
’éĘ Story telling.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Discussion.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Question and answer.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Guided discovery.’ĆĀ
 
Life Skills and Values 
’éĘ Appreciation.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Kindness.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Helpless.’ĆĀ
’éĘ Sympathy.’ĆĀ
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to gain in the issues that helped Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) to succeed in his mission and demonstrates life skill 
for upholding Islamic virtues. 


--- PAGE 188 ---
175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language 
Competences 
Content Suggested Instructional 
Strategies 
Resources 
The learner: 
’éĘ Defines and 
describes the 
nature of Prophet 
MuhammadŌĆÖs 
miracles (PBUH). 
The learner: 
’éĘ Pronounces, spells, 
reads, writes and 
correctly uses the 
following words 
related to the topic: 
- Miracle. 
- Miraculous. 
- Escape. 
- Pour. 
’éĘ Meaning of ŌĆ£miracleŌĆØ. 
’éĘ The nature of Prophet 
MuhammadŌĆÖs miracle 
(PBUH). 
’éĘ Invite a resource person 
to introduce the topic to 
learners. 
’éĘ Let learners brainstorm 
on the meaning of 
ŌĆ£miracleŌĆØ. 
’éĘ Guide learners to 
differentiate between a 
ŌĆ£miracleŌĆØ and a 
ŌĆ£wonderŌĆØ. 
’éĘ Tell learners the nature 
of Prophet MuhammadŌĆÖs 
miracles (PBUH). 
’éĘ Charts 
’éĘ Text books 


--- PAGE 189 ---
176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ’éĘ Prophets miracles 
- The QurŌĆÖan. 
- Isra and miraj. 
- His escape during 
migration. 
- The dust he threw during 
the battle of Badr. 
- The story of ThaŌĆÖalaba. 
 
 
- Importance of the miracles. 
’éĘ Guide learners to 
identify miracle that were 
performed by Prophet 
Muhammad (PBUH). 
’éĘ Let learner narrate 
stories of concerning 
Prophet MuhammadŌĆÖs 
miracles (PBUH). 
’éĘ Task learners to 
individually list the 
usefulness of the 
knowledge of the 
ProphetŌĆÖs miracles. 
’éĘ Guide learners to 
identify relevant 
answers. 
’éĘ Guide learners to do 
note making. 
 
 
Suggested Competence for Assessment 
- Telling the meaning of ŌĆ£miracleŌĆØ. 
- Listing five of the miracles of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). 
- Explaining the importance of knowledge of Prophet MuhammadŌĆÖs miracles. 
- Differentiating between a ŌĆ£miracleŌĆØ and ŌĆ£wonderŌĆØ. 
- Telling a story explaining one of Prophet MuhammadŌĆÖs ŌĆ£miraclesŌĆØ. 


--- PAGE 190 ---
177 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Studies 


--- PAGE 191 ---
178 
 
 
 
 
THEME: LIVING TOGETHER IN UGANDA 
TERM I 
 
TOPIC 1: Location of Uganda on the Map of East Africa 
 
General Background to the Topic 
A learner needs to know the name of his/her country, its location and size. He/she is expected to locate his/her country in relation to 
the neighbouring countries. He/she must also learn how to use a compass, lines of latitudes and longitudes to locate his/her country. 
 
The teacher should help a learner to know the elements of a map and their importance. He/she should also know the number of 
districts that make up Uganda. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to demonstrate an understanding and use of map reading skills to interpret information about oneŌĆÖs immediate and 
distant environment and the interactions of human and other factors. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
’éĘ Effective communication ’éĘ Appreciation 
’éĘ Creative thinking ’éĘ Cooperation 
’éĘ Recording ’éĘ Sharing 
’éĘ Observation  
’éĘ Interpretation  
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the 
districts that form 
Uganda. 
The learner: 
Spells, reads, and writes 
words, structures and 
sentences connected to the 
location of Uganda on the map 
’éĘ Revision of the districts 
that form Uganda. 
’éĘ Revision of the cardinal 
and semi cardinal points 
for identification of 
’éĘ Identifying different districts of Uganda. 
’éĘ Identifying neighbouring countries 
using cardinal and semi-cardinal 
points. 


--- PAGE 192 ---
179 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 of East Africa. 
The new words are cardinal, 
semi- cardinal, and points. 
neighbouring countries.  
’éĘ Locates Uganda on 
the map of East 
Africa. 
Spells, reads and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
connected to the location of 
Uganda on the map of East 
Africa. 
The new words are 
latitudes and longitudes. 
’éĘ Lines of latitude 
These are imaginary lines 
running from the West to 
the East of the globe. 
’éĘ Lines of longitude 
These are imaginary lines 
running from the North 
Pole to the South Pole of 
the globe. 
’éĘ Drawing the map of Uganda showing 
major lines of latitude and longitude. 
’éĘ Identifying latitudes and longitudes that 
go through Uganda using the atlas. 
’éĘ Locating Uganda on the map of East 
Africa using compass directions. 
’éĘ Identifies UgandaŌĆÖs 
neighbours. 
Spells, reads and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
connected to identifying 
UgandaŌĆÖs neighbours. 
The words are: directions and 
neighbours. 
’éĘ Kenya 
’éĘ Tanzania 
’éĘ South Sudan 
’éĘ Democratic Republic of 
Congo 
’éĘ Rwanda 
’éĘ Mentioning countries that share 
boundaries with Uganda. 
’éĘ Identifying compass directions of 
UgandaŌĆÖs neighbours. 
’éĘ Modeling the map of Uganda with her 
neighbours using clay and seeds. 
’éĘ Tracing the map of Uganda on hard 
cards and cut it out for learners. 
’éĘ Describes elements 
of a map. 
Pronounces, reads and writes 
words, structures and 
sentences related to elements 
of a map. 
The word is elements. 
’éĘ Key 
’éĘ Scale 
’éĘ Compass direction  
’éĘ Title 
’éĘ Frame 
’éĘ Measuring distances between different 
places on the map of Uganda using a 
ruler and record the results. 
’éĘ Reading any map of Uganda from the 
atlas, using the key to interpret the 
symbols. 


--- PAGE 193 ---
180 
 
 
 
Suggested Competence for Assessment 
’éĘ Draw a map of Uganda showing the neighbouring countries. 
’éĘ Which country is found in the South West of Uganda? 
’éĘ List three major features of a map. 
 
TOPIC 2: Physical Features in Uganda 
 
General Background to the Topic 
The learner is expected to explain what physical features are as well as name and locate major physical features in Uganda. He/she 
should discuss the formation of different types of physical features. 
 
The learner should be: 
- given the opportunity to examine any physical feature in his/her environment. 
- guided to explain how different types of physical features influence peopleŌĆÖs lives and other living things. 
- guided to develop the skills of caring for physical features. 
 
Learning outcome 
The learner is able to explore, understand and appreciate the value of oneŌĆÖs immediate and distant environment for better health and 
harmonious living. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be Developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
’éĘ Description ’éĘ Caring 
’éĘ Inquiry ’éĘ Appreciation 
’éĘ Drawing ’éĘ Sharing 
’éĘ Recording ’éĘ Cooperation 
’éĘ Observation  
’éĘ Effective communication  


--- PAGE 194 ---
181 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies different 
physical features of 
Uganda. 
Pronounces, reads, spells and 
writes words, structures related 
to different types of physical 
features. 
The new words are physical 
features and rift valley. 
A rift valley is a deep and wide 
valley that stretches for a long 
distance. 
’éĘ Physical features of 
Uganda 
’éĘ Locating main physical features 
on the map of Uganda. 
’éĘ Drawing the map of Uganda 
showing location of different 
physical features. 
’éĘ Visiting some of the different 
physical features in their local 
environment. 
’éĘ Recording what they have 
observed. 
’éĘ Explains how 
different physical 
features were 
formed. 
Pronounces, reads, spells and 
writes words and sentences 
related to the formation of 
different physical features. 
The new words are volcanicity, 
faulting, folding, warping and 
depression. 
’éĘ Formation of different 
physical features. 
’éĘ Explaining the concept on 
formation of various physical 
features. 
’éĘ Demonstrating how these 
physical features are formed. 
’éĘ Drawing diagrams showing 
different formations of physical 
features. 
’éĘ Explains the 
influence of different 
physical features on 
climate. 
Pronounces, reads, spells and 
writes words, structures and 
sentences related to the 
influence of physical features on 
climate. 
The new words are temperature 
and rain formation. 
’éĘ Influence of physical 
features on climate. 
’éĘ Explaining the concept of physical 
features and their influence on 
climate. 
’éĘ Explains the 
influence of different 
Reads, spells and writes words, 
structures and sentences related 
’éĘ Influence of physical ’éĘ Identifying different ways in which 
physical features affect 


--- PAGE 195 ---
182 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
physical features on 
living things. 
to the influence of different 
physical features on living things. 
The new words are living things 
and human activities. 
features on: 
- Vegetation. 
- animals and birds. 
- human beings. 
vegetation, animals, birds and 
people. 
’éĘ Identifies the 
importance of 
different types of 
physical features. 
Spells, reads and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
connected to different types of 
physical features. 
The new words are boundaries, 
settlement, tourist attraction and 
provision of shelter. 
’éĘ Importance of different 
types of physical features: 
’é¤ Mountains and 
highlands. 
 
’é¤ Plateau. 
 
’é¤ Lakes and rivers. 
 
’é¤ Rift valley. 
 
 
’éĘ Discussing the importance of 
mountains and highlands. 
’éĘ Listing activities that are carried 
out on a plateau. 
’éĘ Visiting different physical features 
in the local environment. 
’éĘ Naming and identifying different 
types of fish found in these lakes 
and rivers. 
’éĘ Locating the rift valley on the map 
of Uganda. (From upper Lake 
Albert to Kisoro). 
’éĘ Drawing the map of Uganda 
showing major physical features. 
’éĘ Identifies problems 
associated with 
different types of 
physical features. 
Reads, spells and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
connected to problems 
associated with different types of 
physical features. 
’éĘ Problems associated with 
different types of physical 
features: 
- Mountains and 
highlands. 
’éĘ Visiting some of the physical 
features in their locality and 
identifying some problems they 
cause. 
’éĘ Writing four problems that are 
caused by physical features. 


--- PAGE 196 ---
183 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 The new words are associated, 
keep dangerous animals. 
- Plateau. 
- Lakes and rivers. 
- Rift valley. 
’éĘ Identifying water borne diseases 
’éĘ Recording their findings. 
’éĘ Identifying problems brought 
about by lakes and rivers. 
’éĘ Analyses possible 
solutions to 
problems caused by 
physical features. 
Pronounces, spells, reads and 
writes words, structures and 
sentences related to solutions to 
problems caused by physical 
features to human activities. 
’éĘ Mountains and highlands. 
’éĘ Lakes and rivers. 
’éĘ Identifying activities done by 
females and males on different 
physical features. 
 The new words are: sensitizing  
 and educating people on how to  
 solve problems associated with  
 physical features.  
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Mention two reasons why mountains and highlands are important to Ugandans. 
’éĘ Name any mountain in Uganda formed by volcanic action. 
’éĘ State two ways in which lakes and rivers can cause problems to people. 
’éĘ Give two ways in which females and males can protect lakes and rivers. 
 
TOPIC 3:      Climate of Uganda 
 
General Background to the Topic 
The learner shou ld explain what climate is and locate the major climatic regions of Uganda on the map. He/she should discuss how 
climate influences human activities. The learner should also be able to identify the different problems associated with clima te and list 
possible solutions to these problems. 
 
Learning Outcome 


--- PAGE 197 ---
184 
 
 
 
The learner is able to understand and appreciate the value of climate to all living things and explain ways of maintaining climate for 
better health and harmonious living. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
’éĘ Observing ’éĘ Appreciation 
’éĘ Inquiry ’éĘ Co-operation 
’éĘ Drawing ’éĘ Sharing 
’éĘ Critical thinking ’éĘ Caring 
’éĘ Effective communication  
’éĘ Describing  
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies and 
describes the major 
climatic regions of 
Uganda. 
Spells, reads and writes 
words, structures and 
sentences related to 
climatic regions of 
Uganda. 
 
The new word is climate. 
’éĘ Climate. 
’éĘ Climatic regions: 
- Hot regions. 
- Wet regions. 
- Dry regions. 
’éĘ Stating meaning of climate. 
’éĘ Locating major climatic regions 
on the map of Uganda. 
’éĘ Tracing the map of Uganda and 
showing the major climatic 
regions. 
’éĘ Describes how 
physical features 
influence climate 
conditions. 
Reads, pronounces and 
writes words and 
sentences related to how 
physical features 
influence climate. 
The new words are 
influence and conditions. 
’éĘ Influence of physical features on 
climate: 
- Highlands: relief rainfall. 
- Water bodies: conventional 
rainfall. 
- Plains: wet and dry climate. 
’éĘ Locating physical features and 
their influence on climatic 
conditions. 
’éĘ In groups draw maps of Uganda 
showing the different physical 
features with their climatic 
conditions. 
’éĘ Explains how 
climate influences 
Reads, pronounces and 
writes words and 
sentences related to how 
’éĘ How climate influences human 
activities 
’éĘ Locating wet areas on the map 
of Uganda. 


--- PAGE 198 ---
185 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
human activities. climate influences human 
activities. 
The new words are 
influences and human 
activities. 
- Wet climate. 
- Dry climate. 
’éĘ Naming different crops grown in 
dry and wet climatic conditions. 
’éĘ Locating the dry areas where 
animals are reared. 
’éĘ Drawing the map of Uganda 
showing major agricultural and 
major cattle keeping areas. 
’éĘ Identifies the 
problems associated 
with wet and warm 
areas to living things 
and possible 
solutions. 
Reads, spells, 
pronounces and writes 
words, structures and 
sentences related to 
problems associated with 
wet and warm areas to 
living things. 
The new words are: 
vectors, problems and 
solutions. 
’éĘ Problems associated with wet and 
warm areas to living things. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Possible solutions. 
’éĘ Identifying the different pests, 
viruses and vectors that cause 
diseases to plants and animals. 
 
’éĘ Discussing two methods which 
are used to destroy animal and 
plant pests. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Name two problems faced by people in dry areas. 
’éĘ Which two human activities are carried out in wet areas of Uganda? 
’éĘ Write two activities people should do to maintain good climatic conditions. 
 
TOPIC 4:      Vegetation in Uganda 
 
General Background to the Topic 
In Primary Four, the learner was introduced to different types of vegetation in his/her district. He/she visited various type s of 
vegetation in his/her environment and saw the way people and other living things bene fit from it. The learner was encouraged to 
acquire skills of caring and preserving the vegetation for future use. 


--- PAGE 199 ---
186 
 
 
 
In Primary Five, the learner is expected to exercise his/her knowledge and skills of conserving the vegetation. In addition, the learner 
will understand factors that influence vegetation distribution in Uganda, its relationship with population distribution and how it meets 
peopleŌĆÖs demands for food and settlement. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to show, understand and appreciate the importance and value of vegetation for better living. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
’éĘ Description ’éĘ Caring 
’éĘ Drawing ’éĘ Appreciation 
’éĘ Observation  
’éĘ Critical thinking  
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies different 
types of vegetation 
Pronounces, reads, spells 
and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
related to different types 
of vegetation. 
 
The new word is 
vegetation. 
’éĘ Vegetation is the general plant cover of an 
area. 
’éĘ Different types of vegetation 
- Natural vegetation. 
- Planted vegetation. 
Examples of natural vegetation 
- forests. 
- swamps. 
- shrubs. 
- grass. 
 
Examples of planted vegetation 
- forests. 
- grass. 
- flowers. 
- crops. 
’éĘ Studying the vegetation 
map of Uganda in your 
atlas and identifying the 
different types of 
vegetation. 


--- PAGE 200 ---
187 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
’éĘ Identifies factors that 
influence vegetation 
distribution. 
Pronounces, reads, spells 
and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
that are related to the 
factors that influence 
vegetation distribution. 
The new phrase is 
vegetation distribution. 
’éĘ Factors that influence vegetation distribution 
- Rainfall. 
- Fertile soils. 
- Distance from the sea (altitude). 
- Land forms (mountains, plateau and 
valleys). 
’éĘ Drawing the map of 
Uganda showing areas 
with different rainfall 
patterns and resultant 
vegetation. 
’éĘ Explains different 
ways vegetation 
influences human 
activities. 
Reads, pronounces, 
spells and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
that are related to 
different ways vegetation 
’éĘ Different ways vegetation influences human 
activities: 
- Savannah grassland. 
- Rain forests. 
- Mountain vegetation. 
- Swamp vegetation. 
’éĘ Visiting any vegetation 
around the school: 
- Observe and record 
human activities which 
are carried out in that 
vegetation. 
’éĘ Suggesting any other 
activity that can be carried 
out in that area. 
 influences human 
 activities. 
 The new words are 
 savannah and rain 
 forests. 
’éĘ Demonstrates 
correct ways of 
conserving 
vegetation. 
Spells, pronounces, reads 
and writes words and 
sentences related to the 
use and conservation of 
vegetation. 
’éĘ Uses of vegetation. 
’éĘ Ways of conserving vegetation. 
’éĘ Visiting a nearby farm: 
- Observing and 
recording. 
- Listing human activities 
that conserve the 
vegetation. 
’éĘ Planting trees, grass and 
flowers in the school 
compound. 
’éĘ Making footpaths and 
  
The new word is 
 
 conserve.  


--- PAGE 201 ---
188 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
   hedges to protect trees 
and grass in the school 
compound. 
’éĘ Discusses human 
activities that affect 
vegetation. 
Spells, pronounces, 
reads, and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
related to human activities 
that affect vegetation. 
 
The new words are 
pollution and dumping. 
’éĘ Human activities that negatively affect 
vegetation. 
’éĘ Visiting any possible site 
where the vegetation has 
been destroyed. 
’éĘ Planting trees, grasses 
and flowers in the school 
compound. 
’éĘ Identifies the 
relationship between 
vegetation and 
population 
distribution. 
Spells, pronounces, reads 
and writes words, 
structures and sentences 
related to the relationship 
between vegetation and 
population distribution. 
’éĘ Relationship between vegetation and 
population distribution. 
’éĘ Locating areas near the 
school where there are 
many people and where 
there are few people. 
’éĘ Finding out what kind of 
vegetation is growing 
there.  The new words are 
 relationship and 
 population distribution. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Write any two activities you do at school or your home to look after vegetation. 
’éĘ Mention two uses of trees in Uganda. 
’éĘ List four types of vegetation. 


--- PAGE 202 ---
189 
 
 
 
TOPIC 5: Natural Resources in Uganda 
 
General Background to the Topic 
This topic introduces the learner to the natural resources in Uganda. It leads him/her to know the different types of natural resources 
and their location on the map of Uganda. 
 
The learner will also learn about their value, uses and how they contribute to the economic growth. He/she will also identify problems 
associated with their development as well as possible ways of solving them. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to know the natural resources in their immediate and distant environment, how people use them to earn a living 
and analyse bad practices that destroy natural resources. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
’éĘ Observation ’éĘ Appreciation 
’éĘ Interpretation ’éĘ Sharing 
’éĘ Recording ’éĘ Caring 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains what natural 
resources are. 
’éĘ Identifies different 
types of natural 
resources in Uganda. 
Spells, pronounces, reads, 
and writes words, structures 
and sentences related to 
types of natural resources in 
Uganda. 
The new words are natural 
and resources. 
’éĘ The concept of natural resources. 
’éĘ Different types of natural 
resources in Uganda. 
’éĘ Locating the different types 
of natural resources in 
Uganda using the map of 
Uganda. 
’éĘ Tracing the map of Uganda 
and showing the major 
natural resources. 
’éĘ Locating different 
natural resources in 
Uganda. 
Pronounces, spells, reads 
and writes words, structures 
and sentences related to 
location of different natural 
’éĘ Location of different natural 
resources on the map of Uganda 
’é¤ Water:  Lakes, rivers and 
’éĘ Tracing a map of Uganda 
and locating the major 
natural resources. 


--- PAGE 203 ---
190 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 resources in Uganda. 
The new words are: natural 
resources and minerals. 
springs. 
’é¤ People: Total population ŌĆō 
men and women. 
’é¤ Animals:  Domestic and wild. 
’é¤ Vegetation: Grasslands and 
swamps. 
’é¤ Climate: Sunshine and wind. 
 
’éĘ Discusses the 
importance of natural 
resources. 
Spells, pronounces, reads 
and writes words, structures 
and sentences related to 
the importance of natural 
resources. 
The new words are: 
importance, products and 
generation of electricity. 
’éĘ Importance of natural resources 
- Land. 
- Minerals. 
- Water. 
- Climate. 
- People. 
- Animals. 
- Plants. 
’éĘ Visiting the nearest 
resource and finding out 
how it is utilized (forest, 
swamp, water source and 
mine). 
’éĘ Discussing how resources 
are used. 
’éĘ Discussing with any 
resource persons to talk to 
learners. about the natural 
resources. 
’éĘ Identifies problems 
associated with the 
development of 
various natural 
resources. 
Reads, spells, pronounces 
and writes words, structures 
and sentences connected to 
development of various 
natural resources. 
The new words are: 
development, associated 
and smuggling. 
’éĘ Problems associated with 
development of various natural 
resources. 
’éĘ Discussing problems 
associated with developing 
of various natural 
resources. 
’éĘ Debating how people 
misuse natural resources. 
’éĘ Discusses ways of 
caring for natural 
Spells, pronounces, reads, 
and writes words, structures 
and sentences connected to 
’éĘ Care for natural resources: 
- Proper land use. 
’éĘ Cleaning water sources. 
’éĘ Planting trees. 


--- PAGE 204 ---
191 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
resources. ways of caring for natural 
resources. 
The new words are proper 
land use. 
- Careful development of 
minerals. 
- Avoid pollution. 
- Proper health care, nutrition, 
education and government. 
- Conservation. 
’éĘ Listening to resource 
persons (Forest Officer). 
’éĘ Visiting a nearby natural 
resource and recording 
what you have seen. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Give three different uses of each of the following natural resources: 
(a) Lakes, rivers and streams. 
(b) Wildlife. 
(c) Minerals. 
(d) Land. 
’éĘ Mention any two uses of minerals to Uganda. 
’éĘ Give two reasons why lakes should not be polluted. 


--- PAGE 205 ---
192 
 
 
 
TERM II 
 
 
TOPIC 6:      The People of Pre-Colonial Uganda 
 
General Background to the Topic 
In Primary Four, the learner learnt about the people in his/her district and how they use both the physical and social environment to 
earn a better living. 
 
In Primary Five, the learner should know the major ethnic groups of people, their origins and settlement in Uganda. He/she sh ould  
also know the social and political organisation of these ethnic groups. Since e very human being struggles to have improved living, the 
learner should also study the economic organisation of the pre -colonial societies in Uganda, the food and cash crops which were 
grown by those different ethnic groups. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to promote and practice desirable knowledge and values in the society and show respect for his/her culture and 
those of other people; demonstrate an understanding of and use map reading skills to interpret information. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be developed 
 
’éĘ Skills ’éĘ Values/attitudes 
’éĘ Effective communication ’éĘ Appreciation 
’éĘ Self-awareness ’éĘ Cooperation 
’éĘ Friendship formation ’éĘ Respect 
 ’éĘ Love 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the different 
ethnic groups of 
Uganda. 
Pronounces, writes, spells 
and names the words 
related to the ethnic 
groups of Uganda. 
’éĘ The concept of ethnic. 
’éĘ Major ethnic groups of Uganda: 
- Bantu. 
- Luo. 
’éĘ Locating the areas occupied by 
the different ethnic groups in 
Uganda using the map of 
Uganda. 
’éĘ Identifying learners in class who 


--- PAGE 206 ---
193 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
  - Nilo-Hamites. 
- Hamites. 
represent various ethnic groups. 
’éĘ Locates the origin of 
the different ethnic 
groups. 
Reads, pronounces, 
spells, and writes 
structures and sentences 
related to the origin of 
different ethnic groups. 
’éĘ Different places of origin of the 
Bantu ŌĆō Central West Africa. 
Luo - Bahr El Gazel (South 
Sudan). Nilo-Hamites ŌĆō 
(Ethiopia). 
Hamites ŌĆō North East Africa. 
’éĘ Drawing the map of Uganda 
showing routes of ethnic groups. 
’éĘ Telling some of their legends they 
know from their ethnic groups. 
’éĘ Explains the concept 
of ŌĆ£immigrationŌĆØ. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Reasons for internal 
migrations. 
Reads, pronounces, 
spells, and writes 
structures and sentences 
related to the causes of 
immigration into Uganda. 
The new words are 
migration, immigration 
and scarcity 
’éĘ The concept of immigration. 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Causes of immigration and 
migration: 
- Scarcity of water and pasture for 
their animals. 
- Scarcity of land and internal 
conflicts. 
’éĘ Mentioning what immigration is. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Explaining the causes of 
immigration by different ethnic 
groups into Uganda. 
’éĘ Discusses the 
settlement patterns 
of the various ethnic 
groups in Uganda. 
Pronounces, spells, writes 
and reads words, 
sentences and structures 
related to the settlement 
patterns of the ethnic 
people. 
The new words are 
agriculturalists and cattle 
keepers. 
’éĘ Factors affecting settlement 
patterns: 
- Land, vegetation, climate, soils 
and water. 
’éĘ Areas of settlement: 
- Agriculturalists (Bantu) settled 
around lakes, rivers and 
mountains. 
- Lakes (Victoria, Kyoga, Albert 
and George) 
’éĘ Identifying factors that influenced 
the pattern of settlement of ethnic 
groups. 
’éĘ Retelling the stories of origin of 
ethnic groups after inquiring from 
parents. 


--- PAGE 207 ---
194 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
  - Mountains (Rwenzori, Elgon 
and Mufumbira) where soils 
are suitable for agriculture. 
- Pastoralists settled in 
grassland areas of the West, 
North and North East. 
 
’éĘ Identifies the 
different political 
organisations of the 
ethnic groups. 
Reads, spells, 
pronounces and writes 
words, sentences and 
structures related to the 
political organisation of 
’éĘ Political organisation of the ethnic 
group. 
- Centralized administration - 
kingdoms (kings, were leaders). 
- Clan leadership (chiefs or clan 
elders). 
- Warriors as leaders. 
- Wisemen as leaders. 
- Roles of leaders of different ethnic 
groups. 
’éĘ Identifying different traditional 
rulers in various parts in Uganda. 
 the ethnic groups. 
 The new words are 
 political, organisation and 
 centralized administration. 
’éĘ Explains the social 
organisation of 
ethnic groups. 
Pronounces, reads, 
speaks and writes words, 
sentences and structures 
related to the social 
’éĘ Ethnic groups have their identities 
- Language. 
- Names. 
- Customs. 
- Clans ŌĆō totems as a symbol. 
- Values. 
- Games ŌĆō Mweso, wrestling. 
’éĘ Values ŌĆō meaning of values: 
- Types of values: personal, 
family, community values - 
God fearing, respect, 
cleanliness, honest, helpful, 
’éĘ Discussing their family identities. 
’éĘ Stating the meaning of clan 
names. 
’éĘ Discussing with parents the areas 
of their ancestral location. Then 
report to the class. 
’éĘ Listing names of clan totems. 
’éĘ Practicing social norms of ethnic 
groups (marriage, naming of 
children, enthroning cultural 
leaders, initiation to adulthood, 
 organisation of ethnic 
 groups. 
’éĘ Identifies various 
 
The new words are: 
social values. language, totems, values 
 and clans. 


--- PAGE 208 ---
195 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 
’éĘ Explains the 
importance of social 
norms. 
 law abiding, trust, value for 
work. 
’éĘ Importance of social norms. 
’éĘ Relationships: 
- Meaning of relationships ŌĆō how 
people interact with each other. 
- Types of relationships: blood, 
peer, social and marriage 
relationships. 
responsible childhood and 
adulthood). 
’éĘ Identifies how the 
ethnic groups 
developed economic 
organisations. 
Reads, spells, writes and 
pronounces words, 
structures and sentences 
related to the economic 
organisation of the ethnic 
group. 
The new words are: 
exchange, bartering and 
crafts. 
’éĘ Development of economic 
organizations. 
- Produced things they needed 
to use in their daily lives. 
- Trade developed on craft 
materials, salt, and keeping 
domestic animals. 
- Exchange of goods for goods 
or services for services 
(bartering) bark cloth, salt. 
- Metal tools (hoes, spears and 
shields). 
- Animals like cattle, goats and 
sheep. 
- Grain food (millet and 
sorghum). 
’éĘ Explaining how things are 
exchanged today. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 


--- PAGE 209 ---
196 
 
 
 
’éĘ Draw the map of Uganda in your exercise books showing the location of ethnic groups. 
’éĘ List different ethnic groups in Uganda. 
’éĘ Mention five goods which are given to girlsŌĆÖ families during marriage ceremonies. 
’éĘ List five roles and responsibilities of traditional rules in Uganda. 
 
TOPIC 7:      Foreign Influence in Uganda 
 
General Background to the Topic 
In the last topic, the learner identified the different ethnic groups and how they migrated into Uganda. In this topic, the learner will 
cover why the foreigners came to Uganda, their contribution and influence. 
 
The Arab traders from Asia were the fi rst to come to Uganda. They came with guns, cloth, carpets, cowrie shells, beads and other 
goods which were exchanged for slaves, ivory, gold, salt and animal skins. Later, came the Europeans who were explorers, Chri stian 
Missionaries and colonial administrators. These influenced the social, economic and political life of Ugandans. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to understand the importance of the interdependence among people and nations and demonstrate an 
understanding of and use of map reading skills to collect information. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be Developed 
Skills Values/attitudes 
- Effective 
communication 
- Appreciation 
- Creative thinking - Co-operation 
- Observation - Respect 
 - Love 
 - Tolerance 


--- PAGE 210 ---
197 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject 
Competences 
Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the 
origin of different 
foreigners who 
came into 
Uganda. 
Spells, reads, pronounces 
and writes words, sentences 
and structures related to 
foreign influence in Uganda. 
 
The new words are 
foreigners, influence, natives 
and contribution. 
’éĘ The concept of foreigners. 
’éĘ Places of origin: 
’éĘ Locating the following 
places on the map of East 
Africa (Indian Ocean, Lake 
Victoria, River Nile, 
Mombasa, Dar-es-Salaam, 
Zanzibar, Pemba and 
Bagamayo. 
’éĘ Identifying other important 
places. 
’éĘ Explains the 
reasons why 
foreigners came 
into Uganda. 
Pronounces, reads, spells, 
and writes words and uses 
them in structures related to 
foreign influence in Uganda. 
The new words are trading, 
missionaries, administrators, 
explorers, raw materials and 
imported goods. 
’éĘ Reasons why foreigners came to 
Uganda. 
’éĘ Identifying products which 
were brought into Uganda 
by foreigners. 
’éĘ Explains the 
influence of 
foreigners and 
contribution to 
Ugandans. 
Pronounces, reads, spells, 
and writes words, sentences 
and structures related to the 
influence of foreigners on 
Ugandans. 
The new words are: daggers, 
cowrie shells, beads, cloth, 
guns, and barter trade. 
’éĘ Foreign influence and contributions. 
’éĘ Change of lifestyles (building, food, 
leadership). 
’éĘ Discussing four ways 
foreigners affected 
Ugandans. 
Places of 
origin 
People 
Asia Arabs and Indian traders. 
Europe Colonial administrators, 
Christian missionaries, 
explorers, traders. 
Coastal 
areas 
Coastal traders. 
 


--- PAGE 211 ---
198 
 
 
 
Suggested competences for assessment 
Ask learners to: 
’éĘ List the groups of foreigners that came to Uganda. 
’éĘ Name three good things foreigners brought to Uganda. 
’éĘ Identify two places in your district which were started by foreigners (school, hospital, farm, etc.). 
(i) Find out in which year it started. 
(ii) The people who started it. 
(iii) Who is responsible for it today? 
 
TOPIC 8:      How Uganda Became a Nation 
 
General Background to the Topic 
In the last topic, you covered how foreigners came into Uganda, with their culture, systems of leadership and ways of trade.  These  
led to bringing together of many kingdoms and other areas to form one country. This country is Uganda. 
 
The learner should explain how Uganda came to be one natio n under the British rule. The learner will be exposed to various 
agreements (Buganda, Toro, Ankole and Bunyoro) and even how the British extended their rule to the rest of the nation. The le arner 
will be introduced to the influence of British rule on Uganda. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to explore, understand and appreciate the value of Uganda as a nation. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be Developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
- Describing - Appreciation 
- Inquiry - Sharing 
- Drawing - Co-operation 
- Observation - Respect 
- Creative thinking - Love 
- Effective 
communication 
 


--- PAGE 212 ---
199 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains what a 
nation means. 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Explains how 
Uganda was made a 
nation. 
 
’éĘ Analyses how 
Uganda signed 
agreements with 
Britain 
Spells, reads, pronounces and 
writes words, sentences and 
structures related to Uganda 
becoming a nation. 
The new words are: nation, 
boundaries, agreement, 
partitioning, colonial powers and 
establishment. 
Meaning of a nation. 
’éĘ The concept of a nation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ How Uganda became a 
nation. 
’éĘ Explaining what a nation means. 
’éĘ Identifying key treaties between 
the British and kings in Uganda. 
’éĘ Discussing areas apart from 
kingdoms that came under 
British in Uganda. 
’éĘ Analyses the 
influence of British 
rule on Uganda. 
’éĘ Spells, reads, pronounces and 
writes words, sentences and 
structures related in this topic. 
’éĘ The influence of British 
rule on Uganda as a 
nation. 
’éĘ Drawing a map of Uganda 
showing colonial districts and 
regions. 
’éĘ Identifying five schools and 
hospitals which were started by 
Europeans. 
’éĘ Describes the 
administrative 
systems that existed 
during the British 
rule in Uganda. 
’éĘ Spells, reads, pronounces and 
writes words related to British 
administrative systems. 
’éĘ The new words are: 
protectorate, chiefdom, direct 
’éĘ The administrative 
systems Uganda had as a 
Protectorate. 
’éĘ The laws in place were 
British laws. 
’éĘ Showing how people were ruled 
through; 
(i) direct rule. 
(ii) indirect rule. 
’éĘ Role playing. 


--- PAGE 213 ---
200 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 and indirect rule.   
’éĘ Explains the positive 
and negative effects 
of colonial rule in 
Uganda. 
’éĘ Spells, reads, pronounces and 
writes words, structures and 
sentences related to effects of 
British colonial rule. 
’éĘ The new words are: 
development, formal trading, 
sectarianism, exploit, 
imprisonment and taxation. 
- Effects of the colonial rule 
in Uganda. 
(i) Economic 
- Positive. 
- Negative. 
(ii) Social 
- Positive. 
- Negative. 
(iii) Political 
- Positive. 
- Negative. 
’éĘ Explaining the political, 
economic and social effects of 
British rule in Uganda. 
’éĘ Discussing how Africans reacted 
towards British rule in Uganda. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Treaties led to nation as a nation and how the British extended their rule to the rest of Uganda. 
’éĘ State three ways in which colonial rule changed the life of Ugandans. 
’éĘ Mention three ways in which African traditional culture was weakened by Britain. 
’éĘ Explain five new things which were introduced by the British Government in Uganda. 
 
 
TOPIC 9:      The Road to Independence  
 
General Background to the Topic 
From the previous topic, the learner is aware that Uganda during the colonial administration experienced many political, soci al and 
economic changes. The road to independence was not a smooth move to Ugandans. There were a number of civi l strives as 
Ugandans during that time resisted colonial rule. However, there were a number of good things which were introduced in Uganda  and 
these are cash crops, formal education, Christianity, Islam, better medical services, taxation, laws and regulations. 


--- PAGE 214 ---
201 
 
 
 
 
In this topic, the learner will learn that the system of administration had unique characteristics. The legal system was not favouring the 
Africans. This forced the formation of the Legislative Council (LEGCO) which had some Africans nominated to r epresent people in  
their areas. The Africans who had fought both in the First and Second World Wars came back and joined their brothers and sist ers at 
home to demand and fight for independence. 
 
The Traditional Kings, chiefs and leading personalities played key roles in mobilizing people and forming the first political parties to 
struggle for independence. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
The learner is able to: 
’éĘ Demonstrate knowledge and appreciate the AfricanŌĆÖs collective responsibility in bringing order and social justice. 
’éĘ Understand the structures and functions of government and demonstrate willingness to participate in the democratic and civic 
process of oneŌĆÖs country. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be Developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
- Effective communication - Appreciation 
- Creative thinking - Tolerance 
- Self-awareness - Co-operation 
 - Respect 
 - Love 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Identifies the 
characteristics of 
colonial administrative 
system and its impact. 
Pronounces, reads, spells, writes and 
uses words, structures and sentences 
related to the characteristics of colonial 
administrative system and its impact. 
The new words are taxation, 
segregation, compulsory labour, political 
Ō¢Ī The characteristics of 
colonial administration. 
’éĘ Discussing why people 
hated to pay taxes. 
’éĘ Writing the food crops 
which were generally 
grown and the cash 
crops that were 


--- PAGE 215 ---
202 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 grievances.  introduced. 
’éĘ Explains why there 
were reactions to the 
colonial legal laws. 
Reads, pronounces, spells, writes and 
uses the words, structures and 
sentences related to the colonial legal 
laws. 
The new words are protest, economic, 
policy, favour. 
’éĘ Reactions to the colonial 
rule. 
’éĘ Identifying different ways 
the Africans were 
mistreated. 
’éĘ Mentioning two ways 
Africans protested 
against the colonial rule. 
’éĘ Identifies the factors 
that led to the 
formation of the 
Legislative Council 
ŌĆśLEGCOŌĆÖ. 
Pronounces, reads, spells, writes and 
uses words, structures and sentences 
related to the formation of LEGCO. 
The new word is legislative council. 
’éĘ Factors that led to the 
formation of LEGCO. 
’éĘ Discussing how LEGCO 
and other associations 
helped in the struggle for 
independence. 
’éĘ Discusses how the 
World Wars I and II 
helped in the struggle 
for independence. 
Reads, pronounces, spells, writes and 
uses words, structures and sentences 
related to leaders who led the struggle 
for national independence and formation 
of political parties. 
The new words are race and 
independence. 
’éĘ Struggles for independence 
- World War I. 
- World War II. 
’éĘ Explaining the ways how 
World War I & II helped in 
the struggle for 
independence. 
’éĘ Identifies groups and 
individuals that led the 
struggle for national 
independence. 
Reads, pronounces, spells, writes and 
uses words, structures and sentences 
related to how World Wars I and II 
helped in the struggle for independence 
of Uganda. 
The new words are traditional leaders, 
struggle and national independence. 
’éĘ Traditional leaders, e.g. 
- Kabaka Mutesa II. 
’éĘ Political leaders 
- Musaazi. 
- Ben Kiwanuka. 
- Milton Obote. 
’éĘ Discussing why political 
parties were formed. 
’éĘ Listing the formed 
political parties and their 
leaders. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 


--- PAGE 216 ---
203 
 
 
 
1. Write down two reasons why Africans struggled for national independence. 
2. Write down any two parties that joined the Democratic Party (DP) in the 1961 elections. 


--- PAGE 217 ---
204 
 
 
 
TERM III 
TOPIC 10: Uganda as an Independent Nation  
 
General Background to the Topic 
In the previous topic, the learner covered the road to independence, the people who struggled for independence, the formation of the 
Legislative Council (LEGCO) and the first political parties. These events led to an independent Uganda. 
 
The learner should explain what independence means, when Uganda got her independence, and be able to mention the symbols of 
the nation and their significance.  The learner should explain what democracy means. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The learner is able to explore, understand the values of an independent country, the national symbols and appreciate the principles of 
democracy in Uganda. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
- Description - Sharing 
- Inquiry - Love 
- Drawing - Caring 
- Critical thinking - Appreciation 
- Effective 
communication 
- Respect 
- Analysis - Sympathy 
- Observation  
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: 
’éĘ Explains what political 
independence means. 
Spells, reads, pronounces 
and writes words, 
sentences and structures 
related to independence. 
’éĘ The concept of independent 
Uganda. 
’éĘ Explaining what independence 
means. 
’éĘ Discussing good things related 
to independent nations. 


--- PAGE 218 ---
205 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 The new words are political 
independence. 
 ’éĘ Identifying the date when 
Uganda attained 
independence. 
’éĘ Identifies national 
symbols and explains 
their significance. 
Spells, reads, pronounces 
and writes words and 
sentences related to 
symbols of the nation. 
The new words are 
symbols, anthem, emblem, 
coat of arms, constitution 
and hoisted. 
’éĘ The symbols of the nation: 
- The National Flag. 
- National Anthem. 
- Coat of Arms. 
- Emblem. 
- Language (English). 
- The Constitution (supreme law). 
’éĘ The significance of the symbols of 
the nation: 
- The Constitution (supreme law). 
- The National Flag. 
- National Anthem. 
- Coat of Arms. 
- Emblem. 
- Language (English). 
’éĘ Explain the symbols of the 
nation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Discussing the significance of 
symbols of the nation. 
’éĘ Explains the meaning of 
democracy and its 
importance. 
Spells, reads, pronounces 
and writes words properly. 
Constructs sentences using 
key words related to 
democracy and elections. 
The new words are 
challenges, election, 
’éĘ Democracy 
- The meaning of democracy. 
- Importance of democracy. 
- Functions of democracy. 
- Challenges of democracy. 
- Roles of the citizens in 
practicing democracy. 
’éĘ Explaining what democracy is. 
’éĘ Discussing and debating the 
importance and functions of 
democracy. 
’éĘ Naming the different elections. 
’éĘ Role-playing elections. 


--- PAGE 219 ---
206 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 citizen, conduct, bad 
practices. 
- Types of elections. 
- How elections are conducted. 
- Bad practices during elections: 
before voting. 
during voting. 
after voting. 
- Electoral commission, electoral 
officials, electoral materials and 
their functions. 
- Respect for democracy and 
elections. 
’éĘ Discussing challenges of 
democracy. 
’éĘ Drawing different election 
materials. 
’éĘ Suggesting two things people 
who get the least votes should 
do after elections. 
’éĘ Role-playing voting exercise. 
’éĘ Discussing importance of 
electing leaders. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Identify the symbols of an independent nation. 
’éĘ Explain the importance of those symbols of a nation. 
’éĘ Explain the principles of democracy. 
 
TOPIC 11: The Government of Uganda  
 
General Background to the Topic 
In the last topic, the learner learnt how Uganda became an independent nation; its symbols and their significance. The learner was 
also exposed to democracy and its principles. 
 
In this topic, he/she is going to learn about the government, the three organs of government, the constitution, duties of government, 
sources of revenue and expenditure as well as rights and responsibilities of citizens of Uganda. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
The learner is able to understand the organs of the government, the constitution and duties of citizens; explain the sources of revenue 
and expenditure by government and understand the rights and responsibilities of the citizens of Uganda. 


--- PAGE 220 ---
207 
 
 
 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be Developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
’éĘ Critical thinking ’éĘ Respect 
’éĘ Observation ’éĘ Care 
’éĘ Listening ’éĘ Cooperate 
 ’éĘ Love 
 ’éĘ Sharing 
 ’éĘ Sympathy 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
The learner: Spells, reads, pronounces ’éĘ The role of a government (the 
ruling body of a country). 
’éĘ The organs of the government: 
- Executive (administer and 
implement decisions and 
programmes). 
- Legislature (to make laws 
which people must observe 
and respect). 
 
- Judiciary (to interpret laws 
made by the legislature). 
’éĘ Explaining the role of the 
government. 
’éĘ Discussing the roles of organs 
the government and their 
significance. 
 
’éĘ Explaining the necessity of the 
separation of legislature and 
judiciary. 
’éĘ Identifies the three 
organs of 
government. 
and writes words, 
sentences and structures 
related to organs of 
government. 
 The new words are 
 government, organs of a 
 government, executive, 
 legislature, judiciary. 
’éĘ Explains the 
meaning of the 
constitution, its 
functions and 
importance. 
Spells, reads, pronounces 
and writes words, 
sentences and structures 
related to the constitution. 
The new words are 
constitution, function, 
’éĘ The constitution 
- Meaning of a constitution. 
- Functions of a constitution. 
- Importance of a constitution. 
’éĘ Explaining the meaning of a 
constitution. 
’éĘ Discussing the importance of a 
constitution. 
’éĘ Explaining the relationship 


--- PAGE 221 ---
208 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 relationship. - Relationship between a 
constitution and elections. 
between the constitution and 
the elections. 
’éĘ Explains the duties 
of the government. 
Spells, reads, pronounces 
and writes words, 
sentences and structures 
related to duties of the 
government. 
The new words are 
foreign affairs, budget, 
sanity, election. 
’éĘ Duties of the government 
’é¤ Communication: 
- meaning of 
communication. 
- types of communication. 
- importance of 
communication. 
- barriers of communication. 
’é¤ Administration/leadership. 
’é¤ Conduct elections. 
’é¤ Provide social studies. 
’é¤ Making a budget. 
’é¤ Handles foreign affairs and 
sanity of the nation. 
’éĘ Explaining the duties of the 
government. 
’éĘ Explains the sources 
of revenue and 
expenditure by the 
government. 
Spells, reads, pronounces 
and writes words, 
sentences and structures 
related to the sources of 
revenue and expenditure 
by the government. 
The new words are value 
added tax, donation, 
tourism, license, loan, 
Revenue is income by government 
Ō¢Ī Taxation 
- Income Tax 
- Value Added Tax (VAT) 
- Property Tax 
Ō¢Ī Tourism 
Ō¢Ī Licenses 
Ō¢Ī Donations and gifts 
Ō¢Ī Loans and grants 
 
 
’éĘ Explaining what income is. 
’éĘ Discussing how government 
earns money. 


--- PAGE 222 ---
209 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
 grant, bill, property. 
 
 
 
 
 
- Expenditure is how 
government uses or 
spends money. 
Ō¢Ī Sale of government bills and 
properties 
Ō¢Ī Expenditure 
- salaries and allowances 
- development programmes 
- rent 
- security 
- social services 
 
 
 
 
’éĘ Explaining the ways in which 
government spends its 
revenue. 
’éĘ Explains the rights 
and responsibilities 
of citizens of 
Uganda. 
Spells, reads, pronounces 
and later makes 
sentences using words 
related to rights and 
responsibilities of citizen 
of a country. 
The new words are right, 
responsibility, child 
labour, security, 
development. 
’éĘ Rights 
What a citizen must have (life, 
food, shelter, education, cloth, 
water, medical care and 
security) 
’éĘ Responsibilities 
What a citizen should do to 
contribute to the development of 
Uganda. 
’éĘ Child Labour Education. 
’éĘ Explaining the rights of citizens 
of Uganda. 
 
 
 
’éĘ Explaining the responsibilities 
of Ugandans. 
 
’éĘ Discussing causes and ways 
of child labour and how to stop 
it. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Explain the various organs of a nation and their significance. 
’éĘ Discuss the importance of a constitution to a nation. 
’éĘ Draw a chart showing how government gets revenue and spends it. 


--- PAGE 223 ---
210 
 
 
 
TOPIC 12:    Population, Size and Distribution 
 
General Background to the Topic 
The learner has idea of numbers of learners in different cla sses in the school. This is called population. Every morning there is roll call 
and the totals are put together, this is a simple census. 
 
In this topic, the learner will learn about the population of Uganda, its growth and the importance of a census in a country. He/she will 
also learn the size of the population and its settlement patterns or distribution. The high and low population densities have problems to 
the social, economic and political environments. 
 
The learner therefore needs to equip him/hersel f with possible solutions to the problem. This topic demands the learner as a member 
of the young generation to develop positive attitudes of controlling population growth through family planning, and better re productive 
health practices. 
 
Learning Outcome 
The learner is able to promote and practice desirable values in society and show respect for his/her own and other cultures. 
 
Skills and Values/attitudes to be developed 
 
Skills Values/attitudes 
- Drawing - Love 
- Interpretation of information - Care 
- Critical thinking - Co-operation 
- Observation - Respect 
- Inquiry - Sharing 
- Effective communication - Sympathy 
- Description - Respect 
- Creativity  


--- PAGE 224 ---
211 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
Learner: 
’éĘ Explains the 
importance of a 
census. 
Reads, spells and 
constructs sentences using 
words related to the census. 
The new words are census, 
population, teenage, 
teenager. 
’éĘ Meaning of population and 
census 
- Population is the number of 
people in a given demarcated 
area, e.g. a nation. 
- Census is an official count 
population.  In this case the 
population of Uganda is 
41.49 million (2016). 
- Meaning of teenagers (people 
between 13-19 years of age). 
- Figures of teenagers by 2007 
is 4,823,600 (13-19 years) 
’éĘ Importance of census: 
- Know the total number of 
people 
- Plan for them (social, political 
and economic). 
’éĘ Explaining what population 
and census means. 
’éĘ Counting the number of 
learners, teachers and non- 
teachers in the school (mini- 
census). 
’éĘ Grouping them by sex and 
tribes. 
’éĘ Explains the 
influence of 
population growth on 
communities. 
Reads and constructs 
sentences using words 
related to the population 
growth. 
The new words are: 
population, growth 
immigration and better 
health. 
’éĘ Meaning of population growth: 
- The increase of peopleŌĆÖs 
numbers in the country. 
’éĘ The factors that influence 
population growth: 
- Climate. 
- Fertility rate of women. 
- Immigration. 
’éĘ Explaining what population, 
size or number means. 
 
 
’éĘ Discussing the factors that 
lead to population increase. 
’éĘ Explaining the dangers of fast 
population growth. 


--- PAGE 225 ---
212 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
  - Occupation. 
- Food. 
- Better health (reproductive 
health). 
- Social services. 
- Security and peace. 
’éĘ Discussing how to control 
population growth. 
’éĘ Explains what 
population 
distribution means. 
Reads, spells, pronounces 
and writes words related to 
the topic. 
Makes sentences using 
those words. 
’éĘ Population distribution and 
reasons. 
- The spread of people in an 
area and in this case Uganda. 
- Some districts have more 
people than others. 
- Some places like urban 
centres have more people 
than rural areas. 
- Some places like the plateau 
have more people than some 
mountains. 
- Some climatic areas have 
more people than others. 
’éĘ Explaining what population 
distribution means. 
’éĘ Discusses problems 
associated with high 
and low population 
density. 
Constructs sentences using 
related words in the topic. 
’éĘ Meaning of population density. 
’éĘ Meaning of high population. 
’éĘ Meaning of low population 
density. 
 
’éĘ Effects of HIV/AIDS on population 
and economic production. 
’éĘ Discussing factors that are 
associated with: 
- high population density. 
- low population density. 
 
’éĘ Discussing how HIV/AIDS 
affects population. 
’éĘ Social and economic effects of 
HIV/AIDS on the population. 


--- PAGE 226 ---
213 
 
 
 
Subject Competences Language Competences Content Suggested Activities 
   
’éĘ Problems of high population 
density. 
’éĘ Problems associated with low 
population density. 
 
’éĘ Discusses the 
solutions to 
problems of high 
and low population 
density. 
Constructs sentences using 
related words in the topic. 
The new words are   
population density, 
sensitise, export, labour. 
 
 
’éĘ Solutions to high population 
density 
’éĘ Explaining the solutions for 
high population growth. 
’éĘ Discussing the solutions for 
low population. 
’éĘ Explains possible 
ways of controlling 
population growth. 
Constructs sentences that 
have words related to the 
topic. 
The new words are high 
population, low population 
and population growth. 
’éĘ Control of population growth. ’éĘ Discussing ways of controlling 
population growth. 
’éĘ Debating the disadvantage of 
population growth. 
 
Suggested Competences for Assessment 
’éĘ Write the causes of population growth. 
’éĘ List the difficulties a family finds in looking after a big number of children. 
’éĘ List the problems found in a crowded community such as a slum. 
’éĘ Write a composition ŌĆ£The country I want to live inŌĆØ. 